INTRODUCTION TO KANT'S ANTHROPOLOGY
Michel Foucault

A note in the Anthropology indicates that Kant had been delivering
his series of lectures for some thirty years before the text was prepared
for publication; the lectures in anthropology took up the winter
semester, while the summer semester was set aside for physical geography. In fact, that figure is not quite right: by 1756, Kant was already
teaching geography; the lectures in anthropology, however, were
probably not begun before the winter of 1772-1773.

The publication of the text we are all familiar with coincided
with the end of the semester and with Kants definitive retirement
from teaching. The 1797 edition of Neues deutsches Merkur make                                                                     
a brief mention of the news received from Konigsberg: Kant publishes his Anthropology this year. He'd been keeping it under wraps
because, of all his courses, anthropology was the most popular.
Now that he's no longer teaching, he no longer has any scruples
about making the text public. Though Kant must have agreed
to let his programme of teaching appear on the course prospectus
for summer 1797, he had already publicly, if not officially,                     "
announced that due to old age," he "no longer wanted to lecture
at the University. The course having been definitively cancelled,
he resolved to have the text printed.

We know nothing, or virtually nothing, about the different
versions of the text that existed prior to the final draft. After Kants
death, Starke published two collections of his students' and auditors
notes. Neither of these works, however, can be relied upon; it is hard
to have confidence in notes that were published thirty-five years after
Kants death.1 That being said, the second volume does contain an
important element which is not included in the text Kant published:
a chapter entitled Von der intellectuellen Lust und Unlust"2 According
to Starke, the manuscript of this chapter got lost when Kant posted it
from Konigsberg to the printers at Jena. In fact, there is nothing in
the manuscript held in the Rostock library to suggest that a fragment
is missing. It is more likely that Kant did not want to make room in
the published work for a text which had already been delivered as a
lecture. If Starkes first volume has a better claim to our attention, it

is because of its specification of the dates: the notes collected in that
volume were taken during the winter semester of 1790-1791,3 which
suggests that, on two points relating to the conception and to the very
structure of the Anthropology, a change must have occurred between
the year 1791 and the final draft of the manuscript.4

 Of a text elaborated over a period of twenty-five years, a text
 which, as Kant s thinking was taken in new directions, must have
 undergone any number of transformations, we have only one version: the last. The text is given to us already weighed down with
 sedimentation, having closed over the past in which it took shape.
 Those twenty five years which saw the early researches come to
 their conclusions, the inception of the critique, the formation of
 Kantian thought in its tripartite equilibrium, the long-awaited
 elaboration of a system that could withstand attack from the
 Leibnitian return, Schulzes scepticism or Fichte's idealism-are
 all buried deep within the text of the Anthropology. And so it goes
 on, there being no external or reliable criteria available that
would offer the means to date any of the layers that give its geo-
 logical depth.

Still, it would not be uninteresting to discover what fixed coef-
ficient the Anthropology shares with the critical enterprise. In 1772,
was there already, perhaps even subsisting in the very depths of the
 Critique, a certain concrete image of man which no subsequent
 philosophical elaboration would substantially alter and which
 emerges at last, more or less unchanged, in Kant s last published
 text? Moreover, if that image of man managed to reap the rewards
 of the critical experience and yet, for all that, still not be subject to
 any distortion, is this not because it had-if not quite organized and
 determined that experience-then at least indicated the direction it
 might take, acting as its secret guide? The Critique would therefore
 have been inclining toward the Anthropology from the beginning,
 and would in some obscure sense be concluded by it. But it is also
 possible that key elements of the Anthropology were modified as the
 critical enterprise progressed. In which case, if an archaeology of the
 text were possible, would it not reveal the genesis of a homo criticus
the structure of which would be essentially different from the image
of man that went before? Which is to say that, in addition to its particular role as a propaedeutics to philosophy, the Critique would
have also played a constitutive part in the birth and the development of the concrete forms of human existence. Hence there would
be a certain critical truth to man, a truth born of the critique of the
conditions of truth.

But let us not hope for conclusive answers to such unequivocal questions. The text of the Anthropology is given to us in its final
form. Four series of indications will guide our investigation, all of
which are incomplete:

a) The notes or Reflexionen pertaining to the anthropology that
were collected in the Academy edition with a view to determining
their date. It is worth repeating that only a very few of these fragments are long enough to offer a sense of what the Anthropology
might have looked like at any given moment, and while the dates
are prudently only given as approximations, the organization of
the fragments follows the model of the 1798 edition on the
assumption that it had gone unchanged since 1772. In such conditions, only changes made to the detail of the text are discernible.

b) The Academy edition of the Collegentwurfe divides the notes
into two sections: one deals with the years 1770-80, the other with
the period 1780-90. Despite difficulties similar to those presented
by the Reflections, comparison of these texts with the 1798 version
suggests that there had been a major shift in the meaning of the
Anthropology, or in the center of gravity of the work (in the Collegentwurfe, much more weight is given to the themes of history,
citizenship, and cosmopolitanism).5

c) Comparison with the texts from the precritical period and with
those texts more or less contemporaneous with the final draft of the
Anthropology. This should enable us to isolate those elements that
went absolutely unchanged from the very first lectures to the published version. On the other hand, there can be no doubt that some
of the problems with which Kant was preoccupied around the years
1796-1798 had an impact upon the definitive text; in that sense, a
number of themes in the 1798 text were recent additions.

d) Comparison with other texts in the field of anthropology of the
same period. For instance, certain similarities with Baumgartens
Psychologia empirical which Kant had read very early on, give an
unequivocal indication of which elements of the Anthropology
remained constant; on the other hand, other works in the field,
along with C.C.E Schmidts Empirische Psychologies reveal whichelements must have been added later. But here, once again, we have
to be careful: it is often impossible to determine whether Kant was
drawing on a book that had already been published or whether the
author of that book had borrowed such and such an element from
Kant s written doctrine or his lectures (as they were disseminated by
the students notes), that we rediscover in the Anthropology, its place
of origin. It would seem, for example, that Ith was fully acquainted
with all of Kant s works (which he often quotes in his Versuch einer
Anthropologie), Schmidt also refers to it.

But all this cross-checking barely manages to scratch the surface; the
central issue-the relationship between anthropology and critical
thinking-remains untouched. Yet, however inconclusive it may be,
this evidence should not be overlooked: by comparing what it teaches
us with the texts of the Anthropology and those of the Critique, we
should be able to see how Kant s last work engages with the series of
precritical researches, with the whole of the critical enterprise itself
and with the group of works that, in the same period, sought to define
a specific type of knowledge of man, as well as how, in a paradoxical
fashion, those three levels of engagement make the Anthropology con-
temporary with what came before the Critique, with what the
Critique accomplishes, and with what would soon be rid of it.
     For this reason, it is impossible to make a clear distinction
between the genetic perspective and the structural method in theanalysis of this work: we are dealing with a text which, in the thickness of its many layers, its definitive presence and the particular
balance of its elements, is contemporary with each phase of the
movement that it concludes. Only a genetic study of the whole of
the critical enterprise, or, if not that, then a reconstruction of the
movement of the whole, could register the finality of the form in
which it was achieved and dissolved. Conversely, if the structure of
the anthropologico-critical relations could be precisely defined,
then only this could uncover the genesis which was to culminate in
that final stability-or penultimate, if it is indeed the case that the
Opus Postumum was already making the first steps on the ground,
at last regained, of transcendental philosophy.

Let us first deal with the question of dates. A number8 of different
clues give a fairly accurate indication of when Kant wrote the final
draft of the Anthopology, which was published by Nicolovius in
October, 1798:

     1) In a letter to Christoph Wilhelm Hufeland, written in the
last fortnight of March 1797, Kant thanks his correspondent for
sending the book he had just received: the Makrobiotik oder die
Kunst das menschliche Leben zu verldngern (Jena, 1796).9 Kant
promises to read the book slowly: both so that he might conserve
his appetite and be sure to grasp the bold and uplifting ideas on the
strength of the moral disposition which animates physical man,
which he intended to make use of in the Anthropology.                   

       2) By September 20 , 1797, work on the Anthropology was far
enough advanced for Kant s circle of friends and correspondents to
begin looking forward to a new book. "Your Anthropology will be
received with great pleasure, wrote Biester; and, probably on the
assumption that the final draft was already complete, he added:
How wonderful that you'll be sending your text to the printers by
the end of the year-we ve all been looking forward to reading it
for such a long time.
       3) On the 5 November of the same year, Tieftrunk wrote to
ask if there was any news on the book, expressing some surprise
that it had not yet appeared: The public is expecting an Anthropology
from you; will it be published soon?
       4) In fact, it is hard to know for sure whether or not the final
draft was finished at this point. Kant may have been preoccupied
with going over the proofs of the Conflict of the Faculties but his
correspondence shows him to be equally eager for any feedback on
the Anthropology. When, in a letter written on October 13th 1797,  
Kant alludes to the possibility that he might be dying, he suggests
that Tieftrunk read the two texts that Professor Gensichen was to
look after. One was finished and had been for two years the
other was almost complete. It is extremely unlikely that these manuscripts had anything to do with the Anthropology-the term
Abhandlung would not usually be used to refer to a text of such
length. In fact, Kant is alluding to two sections of the Conflict of the
Faculties. Should we therefore presume that the work on the final
draft of the Anthropology [had not yet begun?]15 Or, on the contrary,
that it was already complete and on its way to the publishers?

     5) Schondorffer makes much of the fact that, in the manuscript
of the Anthropology, Dr. Less is not identified by name: in the
section on Albrecht Haller, he is referred to only as a well-known
theologian and ex-colleague (of Haller s) from the university, while
in the published text he is named as Dr. Less. Since Dr. Less died in
1797, we can assume that Kant had not wanted to refer to him by
name while he was still living; it follows, then, that the news of his
death must have reached him in the stretch of time between the completion of the manuscript and when it was sent to the printer.
   
  6) Both more important and more convincing is the fact that
a number of passages from the manuscript found their way, more
or less unchanged, into the published text. Von der Macht des Gemiits
durch den hlossen Vorsatz seiner krankhaften Gefuhle Meister zu sein
this text makes up the third section of the Conflict ofthe Faculties?
In a letter dated April 17th, 1797, Kant talks about the theme of the
 book as if it had suddenly occurred to him. He had just entered his
 seventy-forth year and, happily, had so far been spared any kind of
 illness; it is this which prompts him to speak of "'psychologische
Arzneimitte. It is a fact that his previous letter to Hufeland (writ-
 ten at the end of March)19 makes no mention of it. It was his reading
 of the Makriobiotik that was decisive, as the Response to Hufeland
which opens the Von der Macht des Gemuts indicates.20 That text was
published in the Journal der praktischen Arzneikunde und Wun-
 darzneikunst (4te Stiick, V Band. 1798),21 along with others texts
lifted from the Anthropology.1' We can therefore assume that the
final draft had been or was almost complete by the time Kant wrote
 the article for Hufelands periodical.

      7) A note in the printed text refers to Von der Macht des
 Gemuts. Now, this note does not appear in the manuscript held at
Rostock, which leads us to presume that, at the time he wrote it,
Kant had not yet finished-and perhaps had not even begun-work
on the article meant for Hufeland.

     8) As others have remarked, a note in the margin of the manu-
script refers to a work by Hearne, two German translations of which
were published in 1797. Kant must therefore have read them in the
second half of that year, once the manuscript was finished. But,
once again, we should bear in mind that Kant had already cited
Hearne in Religion within the Boundaries ofMere Reason It is there-
fore possible that the note was a recollection and an addition.
    All of this information indicates a fairly precise date: Kant
must have been putting the final touches to the manuscript of the
Anthropology in the first half of 1797-perhaps in the first three
or four months of that year. It seems that the sudden flash of
inspiration which gave rise to Von der Macht did not interrupt
work on a draft which was already in its last stages, though it is
likely that it delayed the printing and the final corrections. It was
once Von der Macht was finished and perhaps even sent off to
Hufeland that the last changes to the Anthropology were made
(passages that appeared twice were cut out, references were

In itself, the exact date of the text is neither entirely without interest
nor is it altogether conclusive. It acquires its meaning-and shows the
extent to which it is meaningful-only if we consider the text, as it
was at this point in time, alongside both texts written in the same
period as well as those contemporaneous with the first lectures in
Anthropology. If we accept that the text s origins lie in 1772, sandwiched between Kants Inaugural Dissertation of17702} and the On the
Various Races of Mankinds then we see that the Anthropology emerged
over the course of the years which appear to have brought the
precritical period to a close and heralded the Copernican revolution.
     One thing, in any case, is certain: the text published in 1798 fits in
easily with a number of different writings from the precritical period:
     a) Observations on the Feeling of the Beautiful and the Sublime
(1764). The similarities between this text and the Anthropology have
already been carefully and precisely detailed by R. Kempf. They are
worth noting for the analysis of the temperaments. To be sure, from
time to time, the angle adopted in the two texts is completely differ-
ent: in the Observations, the take on the temperaments is structured
around the problem of moral feeling, their classification having been
taken as given; the description in the Anthropology, on the other
hand, is determined by a kind of deduction of the temperaments,
which takes as its starting point the patterns of tension and release of
activity and of feeling. Nevertheless, the content is surprisingly similar, even down to the expressions and the choice of words. On the
topic of the choleric temperament, for example, we read in the Observations that:     
sein Wohlwollen ist Hoflichkeity seine Achtung
Zeremonie and in the Anthropology: "er ist hoflich aher mit Zere-
monie There are similar coincidences around the discussions of the
male and female character, as well as of the distinctive traits that

characterise the different nationalities. All of which clearly indi-
cates the distant origin of the text, the permanence of those elements
which the passage of time left quite literally untouched.
    b) An Essay on the Maladies of the Mind (1764). Here, again,
there are many common elements: the distinction between
Torheit and NarrheiP. "Der Tor ist nicht weise, der Narr ist nicht
klug' the distinction between the illnesses of weakness (Ohn-
macht)y and those of perturbation {Verkehrtheit) reappears in the
Anthropology, its meaning unchanged, as the opposition between
mental deficiencies (Gemutsschwdche) and mental illnesses (Gemutskrankheiten). It is however worth noting that certain types of
madness which, in the Anthropology, come under deficiencies
(Dummheity1G Albernheit,17 Jorhei?) are in the Essay put to one side
and as it were devalorised with regard to the real illnesses deserving
of our sympathy; they are described as diese ekelhafie Krankheiten"
On the other hand, in the Anthropology the important distinction
between the major mental illnesses, while formulated in the same
terms as those of the earlier Essay, is now given a radically different
meaning. The Essays classification is simple: the Verruckungalters the
concepts of experience, and this gives rise to illusions, as in
hypochondria; delirium {Wahnsinn) affects judgement, as in the
case of the melancholic; finally, dementia (Wahnwitz) impacts on
reason and its capacity to make judgements. In the Anthropology,
this classification has been modified: its organizing concepts are
those relating to possible experience, while the notions of amentia,
dementia, insania, and vesania are bracketed under the general head-
ing of alienation (Verruckung), as they are in Sauvage, or Linne. The
affinity between the text of the Anthropology and that of the Essay is
still obvious, but here we have a clearer indication of how the text
was made to fit with the critical discoveries and the scientific developments of the time.
    c) It is also worth noting the echo of a text from 1771, in
which Kant acknowledges a dissertation by Moscati:29 "Von dem
korperlichen Unterschiede zwischen der30 Struktur der Tiere und
Menschen."31 Twenty-six years on, Kant evokes the difficult and, in
his eyes, futile problem of primitive man's upright posture.
    d) Of the Different Human Races (1775).32 The Anthropology
grants less than a page to the problem dealt with in the Essay, and
simply refers the reader to a text by Girtanner, who had recently
provided a summary of Kants ideas in his dissertation: Uber das
kantische Prinzip fiir die Naturgeschichte." But Ofthe Different
Human Races concludes with a brief paragraph which is important
for our understanding of the place given to Anthropology in the
organization of knowledge. Of the Different Human Races was
intended to get the first lecture in physical geography of the summer
semester 1775 under way             and in this sense it belongs to that
discipline. But geography is not an end in itself, it does not simply
refer to itself: as an exercise, it serves as a preliminary introduction
to the knowledge of the world {Weltkenntniss) that in the Anthropology Kant would later make synonymous with a knowledge of
man. This constitution of a Weltkenntniss has two specific features:
     1) It should furnish "all acquired knowledge and skill" with a
pragmatic element, in such a way that, it serves not only to con-
tribute to our schooling,33 but also works as a tool to help organize
and guide our concrete existence.
    2) To do so, the two domains in which knowledge is exercised Nature and Man must not be taken to be big themes,
about which we might occasionally make a few impassioned
remarks; rather, they should be conceived in cosmological terms;
that is, in relation to the whole of which they are a part, and within which they take their place and situate themselves (darin ein
jeder selbst seine Stelle einnimmt) .
        These themes are close to those mentioned in the Introduction

and the last pages of the Anthropology. But, while the thematic con-
tent might remain constant (the prevalence of the pragmatic
element, the concern that knowledge should consider the world as
a unified whole), the texts are structured differently: physical geography and anthropology are no longer set alongside one another as

the two symetrical halves of the knowledge of the world articulated
on the basis of an opposition between man and nature; the task of
directing us toward a Weltkenntniss is now the sole responsibility of
an anthropology which encounters nature in no other form than that
of an already habitable Earth {Erde), As a result, the notion of a cosmological perspective that would organize geography and
anthropology in advance and by rights,36 serving as a single reference
for both the knowledge of nature and of the knowledge of man             
would have to be put to one side to make room for a cosmopolitical
perspective with a programmatic value, in which the world is envis-
aged more as a republic37 to be built than a cosmos given in advance.
At the other extreme of the Kantian oeuvre, the Anthropology is
contemporary with a certain number of texts which, when taken
together, help to determine when the final draft was completed-
or, at least, to establish which were the last additions. Holding on
to both ends of the thread in this way, we are perhaps better
equipped to tackle an issue that is at once historical and structural, and which is apparent both in the chronology of the texts and
in the architectonics of the oeuvre as a whole: the fact, that is, of
the contemporaneity of the critical thinking and the anthropological reflection.

    What, then, were the issues preoccupying Kant as he prepared
the text for publication-this text, so archaic in its concerns, and
so remotely rooted in his oeuvre?

1) The final installment in the correspondence with Jakob Sigismund
Beck?8 The last letter of philosophical interest that Kant wrote to
Beck is dated July 1st, 1794. It deals with what Beck called the
Beilegung the relating of a representation, as a determination of
the subject, to an object distinct from it, by which means it
becomes cognition.39 Kant makes the point that the representation
does not "befit" the object but that a relation to something else
befits the representation, whereby it becomes communicable to
other people.40 He also stresses that grasping (apprehensio) a given
multiplicity and its reception in the unity of consciousness apperceptio) amounts to the very same thing as the representation of a
composite that is possible only through composition.41 And it is
only from the point of view of this composition that we can communicate with one another: in other words, we are able to communicate with one another because of this composition, it is
its relationship to the object that renders the representation valid
for everyone and everywhere communicable; which does not mean
we are exempt from producing the composition ourselves. The
major themes of the Critique-the relation to the object, the synthesis of the manifold, the universal validity of representation-are
in this way directly related to the problem of communication. The
transcendental synthesis is only ever given as balanced in the possibility of an empirical division manifested in the double form of
agreement {Ubereinstimmung) and communication {Mitteilung). In
what only appears to be a contradiction, the fact that a representation can be assigned to more than one thing, and that such
multiplicity is not already given as bound up in itself, is what
ensures that one representation can always be exchanged for another:
    Wir konnen aber nur das verstehen und anderen mitteilen, was
wir selbst machen konnen. 

        There the philosophical correspondence with Beck ends. "I
notice, writes Kant in conclusion to his letter, "that I do not even
entirely understand myself ; he goes onto express his hope that a
mathematician such as Beck might be in a position to shed a sufficiently bright light on this simple, thin thread of our cognitive
faculty."42 The dialogue with Beck would not be renewed in his
lifetime, but it did, in fact, continue-in one direction at least. For

Beck would write three more letters to Kant. The first is once again
concerned with the problem addressed in the last letter: the synthetic unity of consciousness, representation which has no link to
the object outside the act of representation itself. The second
considers two themes: on the one hand, the irreducibility of sensibility and understanding (Is the object that affects the senses a
thing in itself or phenomenon?43 Can understanding be applied to
objects without the condition of sensibility? Is the role of sensibility to affect the subject and of understanding to relate that
subjective sensation to an object?); on the other, the relationship
between theory and practice (In practical awareness, is man, who
raises himself above nature, still a Naturgegenstand?) .AA Finally,
along with the problem of the original activity of understanding,
the third letter considers the Fichtian error of never distinguishing
between practical and theoretical philosophy. To all of this, Kant
gave no reply-or at least not directly. A brief missive to Tieftrunk
alludes to his difficulties with Beck

the real response, however, is
to be found in the Anthropology, partly in the published text, and
partly in a long passage in the manuscript which was omitted from
the final version.

     a) It is important to note the range and the consistency given
to the realm of sensibility in the published text. To be sure, a faculty of apprehension (Auffassungsvermogen) exists which seems to
act in productive capacity with regard to sensibility, in that it is
capable of generating intuition {die Anschauung hervorzubrin-
geri). Here, though, we are dealing with understanding
considered as a faculty of cognition in general. But, taken in the
narrower sense, understanding is opposed to sensible intuition
which remains absolutely irreducible to it to the extent that imagination as the reproductive faculty is organized on the basis of the
originary and insurmountable productivity of sensible intuition. But this does not mean that the faculty of primary
productivity-which understanding can neither reduce or con-
struct-is any less fundamentally linked to the subject through
the a priori forms of intuition. The opposition between under-
standing and sensibility does not threaten the unity that Beck,
insisting on their identity, would call "das ErfahrendeT6,1 "Ich als
denkendes Wesen bin zwar mit mir als Sinnenwesen ein und das-
selbe Subject.           

    In the Anthropology, Kant is also careful to distinguish
between inner sense and apperception. The one is defined as
consciousness of what man does; the other as consciousness of
what he feels. These definitions overlap with those of the Critique, but there is nevertheless a difference. Apperception, which
in the Critique is reduced to the simplicity of an "I think," is
here related to the originary activity of the subject, while inner
sense-which in the Critique was analysed on the basis of the a
priori of time-is given here in the primitive diversity of a
  Gedankenspiel" that operates beyond the mastery of the subject, and which makes of inner sense more the sign of an initial
passivity than a constituting activity.
     b) In the unpublished text, Kant expands in more detail on the
problem of self-cognition.49 Inner sense, thus defined as empirical
consciousness, cannot perceive the T other than as an object-the
T observed which is now taken to be the Inbegriff50 of the objects
of inner perception. Apperception, on the other hand, is defined-
in a sense much closer to that of the Critique-by intellectual
self-consciousness;51 it thus refers neither to any given object, nor
to any intuitive content. It has to do with nothing other than an
act undertaken by the determining subject, and to this extent
belongs not to Psychology, nor to Anthropology, but to Logic.
Whence the great danger, evoked by Fichte, of the subject dividing
into two forms of subjectivity that would no longer able to communicate with one another other than on the unequal footing of
subject to object. This, Kant acknowledged, is a great difficulty.
Still, we should bear in mind that what is in question is not a "doppeltes Ichy but a "doppeltes Bewusstsein dieses Ich" Thus the T
preserves its unity, and if, at times, it presents itself to consciousness
as something perceived and, at others, in the form of a judgement,
this is because it is self-affecting; being, in one and the same gesture,
both "das bestimmende Subjekt" and "das sich selbst bestimmende
Subjekt" In this way, a sensibility irreducible to understanding man-
ages to avert the danger of the division of the subject. There is no
need to bracket the whole of the field of experience under the general heading of understanding, nor to make understanding the
Erfahrende par excellence, nor, finally, to put the orginary form of

  Verstandes-Verfahren into categories-all extreme solutions which
Beck, impressed by his reading of Fichte, thought it necessary to
implement if the division of the Kantian subject was to be avoided.
     Becks letters, which Kant received just as he was completing the
draft of the definitive text of the Anthropology (or very shortly
before), are at the origin of those responses that can be discerned
both in the manuscript and the published work. It is possible that
those passages were omitted from the published text because they
looked too much like reponses to Beck, and to the problems he
raised, to be included in an Anthropology in the proper sense. At the
same time, however peripheral it may have been, the debate with
Beck enabled Kant to define the space in which an anthropology, in
general, could occupy: a space in which self-observation bears not
upon the subject as such, nor upon the pure T of the synthesis, but
upon a T that is object and present solely in its singular phenomenal
truth. But this T-object given to sense in the form of time, is no
stranger to the determining subject; for it is ultimately nothing more
than the subject as it is affected by itself. Far from the space of anthropology being that of the mechanism of nature and extrinsic
determinations (in which case it would be a "physiology"), it is entirely taken over by the presence of a deaf, unbound, and often errant
freedom which operates in the domain of originary passivity. In short,
we see a field proper to anthropology being sketched out, where the
concrete unity of the syntheses and of passivity, of the affected and the
constituting, are given as phenomena in the form of time.
     But locating the place of anthropology in this way is possible
only from the point of view of transcendental reflection. We can
therefore see why Kant gave up the idea of publishing a text so foreign, if not to the problem of anthropology, then certainly to its
own particular level of reflection. The Anthropology should only
contain that which pertains to its own level: the analysis of the concrete forms of self-observation. But, if we look at them together,
the unpublished and the published texts constitute two different
layers of a unified thought process which, in a single move,
responds to Beck, wards off the Fichtian danger, and outlines, or as
it were hollows out, the possible place for an anthropology.

2) 77? discussions on the subject ofthe metaphysics ofLaw. Since the
sixteenth century, juridical thought has been concerned either
with defining the individuals relationship to the State in its gen-
eral form or the relationship between the individual and the thingin the abstract form of property. But here we have, in the second
half of the eighteenth century, an investigation into the forms of
ownership amongst individuals in the concrete and particular forms
of the couple, the family group, the home, and the household: how
can civil society, which is presupposed by the bourgeoisie both as its
foundation and its justification, be divided into discrete units which
no longer have anything to do with the feudal model but which are
solid enough to withstand its final dissolution? Christian Gottfried
Schiitz52 was concerned to find, reading Kant's Metaphysics of
Morals ownership amongst individuals so closely modeled on the
main forms of rights over things. Indeed, Kant makes room for
these forms of ownership in a section entitled Von dem auf
dingliche Art personlichen Recht,"54 which is divided into three
parts according to the three types of aquisition: a man acquires
{erwirbt) a wife; a couple acquires children; a family acquires domestics. Now, Schiitz refused to accept that in matrimony the woman
becomes a thing which belongs to the man";55 the kind of satisfaction which a man can gain from his wife in the context of a marriage
prevents her from being reduced to such a primitively simple status;
the objectification of the other only has any truth in cannibalism:
marriage and the rights that it accords do not make people into res
fungibiles The same goes for servants, who could only be considered things if their capture, and the right to capture them, were
written into the fundamental rules of civil society. In short, the
problem which Schiitz identifies in its various forms comes down to
the constitution of these concrete little islands in bourgeois society
which are recognised neither by the rights of the people nor by theright to the ownership of things: spontaenous syntheses that neither a
theory of contract, nor an analysis of appropriation can quite account
for; fringes of the law where domination is neither of the order of
sovereignty nor of ownership.
    In a letter to Schiitz dated July 10th, 1797-written at the
time when he was probably finishing the final draft of the Anthropology Kant responds to the two objections put to him: the
mutuum adjutorium of sexual relations is the necessary legal con-
sequence of marriage, which is to say that objectification in the
relationship between a man and a woman is not a fact which
founds the law but a fact which arises from a state of law, a state
of law which is contested only if that fact occurs outside of the
law; falling beyond or falling short of the bounds of marriage, the
libertinage of a Freidenker amounts to the same thing, all that
changes is its anthropological form. But, conversely, if the moral
significance of sexual relations changes dramatically according to
whether or not they take place within the juridical structure of a
marriage, the content of the act itself remains the same; one partner becomes a thing for the other, an adjutorium of his pleasure.
The law authorises the fact: but, in so doing, it does not alter the
content, which remains unchanged.
    The same goes for the relationship with servants: evidently we
are dealing here with people, but from a juridical point of view the
relationship is one of ownership. That someone has another person
in his possession represents a jus in re: the servant-in contrast to
a man who works in the day and goes home at night-is an integral part of the Hauswesen
The law might treat the person as a
thing; it does not follow, however, that the person has become a
thing; rather, it establishes a relationship between two people that
is of the same order as that between a person and a thing. In his
objections, Schiitz confuses the moral perspective with the legal perspective, the human being with the subject of the law-a distinction
which Kant rigorously reinstates in his response.
     Nevertheless, Schiitzs objection goes to the very heart of the
anthropological concern, which is itself a point of convergence and
divergence between law and moral principle. The Anthropology is pragmatic in the sense that it does not conceive of man as belonging to the
moral republic of souls (which would make it practical), nor to a civil
society made up of legal subjects (which would make it juridical)\
instead, man is considered to be a "citizen of the world,"59 as belong-
ing, that is, to the realm of the concrete universal, in which the legal
subject is determined by and submits to certain laws, but is at the same
time a human being who, in his or her freedom, acts according a universal moral code. To be a citizen of the world is to belong to a realm
that is as concrete as an ensemble of precise juridical rules, themselves
as universal as moral law Thus, to say that anthropology is pragmatic,
and to say that it envisages man as a citizen of the world, effectively
amounts to saying the same thing. In such conditions, it falls to
anthropology to show how a juridical relationship of the order of a
possession, which is to say zjus rerum, manages to preserve the moral
kernel of a person construed as a free subject. To preserve it, though
not without compromising it at the same time.
    Such is the paradox of the relations between men and women
as they are described in the Anthropology: in her natural state, a
woman is nothing more than a Haustier a domestic animal; yet,
already in primitive polygamy, a game is initiated whereby, even ifwomen are objectified, the possibility of them arguing amongst
themselves, of rivalry or coquetery, makes the owner into the object
of their struggles; the ruses of the harem soon managed to substitute the arbitrary rule of the master for his arbitrary submission to
whoever happens to be the mistress this time around. The monogamous structure of civilised society does not liberate woman from
her status as a possession, far from it: her infidelity, which nullifies
the relationship of ownership, actually authorises the man to
destroy the object of the relation now rendered void: that is, he is
authorised to kill the woman. But jealousy, as a violent form of
interaction which objectifies a woman to the point where she can
simply be destroyed, is also a recognition of her value; indeed, only
the absence of jealousy could reduce a woman to a piece of merchandise, where she would be interchangeable with any another.
The right to be jealous-to the point of murder-is an acknowledgement of a womans moral freedom. Now, the first claim of this
freedom is to escape the consequences of such jealousy; if a woman
is to prove that she is something more than a thing, she has to
incite a form of jealousy that is powerless in the face of the irrepressible exercise of her freedom; hence the introduction of
gallantry within the law of monogamy, which serves to strike a balance between the jus rerum whereby a wife is owned by her
husband, and the moral law whereby everyone is a free subject. To
strike a balance is however not the same as reaching an end, nor
does it follow that things are balanced equally. For gallantry is
nothing more than a muddle of pretensions: the mans, to restrict
the womans freedom by marrying her; the womans, to exercise her
power over the man in spite of marriage. Thus a whole network of
relations are woven together, where neither the law nor morality are
ever present in their pure states, but where their intersection creates
    the space in which human action is played out; this is its concrete
latitude. This is not the level of fundamental freedom, nor that of
legal rule. What emerges is a sort of pragmatic freedom which is all
about pretensions and ruses, dishonourable intentions and dissim-
ulation, secret attempts to gain control, and compromises reached.
       No doubt Kant had all of this in mind when, in the Preface to the
Anthropology, he states as his object what man makes of himself-or
can and should make of himself-as a free-acting being Cfreihandel-
ndes Wesen)- the commerce of freedom with itself, finding itself
restricted by the movement by which it is afirmed; manipulation,
where the negotiations of exchange are never interrupted by the
straightforward recognition of value. Treating man as a reihandelndes
Wesen? the Anthropology uncovers a whole zone of "free-exchange,"
where man trades his second-hand freedoms, connecting with others
by way of an unspoken and uninterrupted commerce which ensures
that he is at home anywhere on earth. A citizen of the world.

3) The correspondence with Hufeland and the third section ofthe Con-
lict of the Faculties. The letters Kant wrote while working on the
final draft of the Anthropology show that, in truth, he was less pre-
occupied by the problems of critical thought-problems which, as
he grew older, he was aware of no longer being able to fully grasp-
 than by a certain form of interrogation in which old age is surprised
 by and becomes a question in itself: What to make of old age, where
 one is no longer capable of grasping the subtleties of transcendental
 thought, and yet still seems to be capable of warding off all kinds of
 illness? Is this a prolongation of life or its end? Does this age of rea-
son imply a mastery over the precariousness of life? Time is running
 out, the end is approaching, regardless of anything we might do-
 could this irrepressible movement somehow be controlled or
bypassed by an active synthesis of reason, which would bring it
under the impassive rule of wisdom? This is the third time that the
problem of passivity and time is seen to be overshadowing the
preparation of the definitive version of the Anthropology.
    This problem intersects with a text published by Hufeland,
entitled          Makrobiotik oder die Kunst das menschliche leben zu
verlangern. The text belongs to a whole movement in German
 medicine illustrated by the work of Reil62 and Heinroth:63 a huge
anthropological drive to adapt the observation of illnesses to a
metaphysics of evil, and to discover by which shared gravitational
pull the collapse into pathological mechanism overlaps with freedoms fall into sin. Hufelands text, although not quite as radical,
is nevertheless in the vicinity of these ideas. For the text, though
showing a degree of restraint, is like the pragmatic mirror image of
the same ideas: for Hufeland it is a question of offering moral
treatment of physical symptoms and of demonstrating that "a culture of morality is indispensable to the physical health of human
beings." Here, in a single stroke, that moralising medicine which,
in the tradition of Rousseau, had been a dominant force at the
close of the eighteenth century, is realized and its meaning over-
turned. In this new ethical physiology, the link between health and
virtue is not one of natural immediacy, as it was for Tissot, but is
given through the universal mastery of reason. Health is the visible
plane of an existence where the organic totality is dominated,
without remainder and without opposition, by a form of rationality
that, beyond any division, is at once ethical and organic; it is the
playground of freedom-the space in which freedom can play, but
precisely a space that is only constituted by its game. And if in the
 pathos of illness there is something which links it to the passions,
it is no longer due to its being too far removed from the calm world
of nature, but because of a dip in the spiritual arc of freedom:
determinism-freedom unbound-is not quite a cause, but nor is
it simply an effect of illness: it is the very process by which illness
produces itself, that is to say the process by which organic ratio-
nality dismantles itself and, in the sin, renounces its freedom. It is
therefore in the good use of freedom that the possibility of das
menschliche leben zu verlangerriHA takes hold, keeping the
mechanics of the body from the sinful fall into mechanism.
     This new orientation in medicine-soon to become the philosophy of nature-acknowledges its kinship with Kantianism.
Hufeland concedes this unreservedly in a letter dated December
12 , 1796, where he tells Kant that has posted him a copy of his
Makrobiotik. Sending Kant a copy was doubly justified-first, by
the fact that Kant was living proof of how it is possible to conserve
ones vitality in old age, even in whilst undertaking the most stin-
gent spiritual labours; second, because his oeuvre authorises a
knowledge of man which is, at bottom, the veritable anthropology.
    When Hufeland's letter and book arrived-they had been quite
considerably delayed, finally reaching him in the middle of March
1797-Kant was interested in the very same problem. He set
about reading Hufeland s book carefully-and slowly, as he wanted
to be sure to have fully understood the author s ideas if he was to
make use of them in his Anthropology About three weeks later,
Kant wrote a letter to Hufeland, telling him everything about his
most recent project { Mir ist der Gedanke in den Kopfgekommen)
to write a Regimen on the topic of the power exercised by the mind
over morbid bodily sensations. He meant to send the work to
Hufeland, despite the fact that the book would not be a medical
one, but more a reflection on his own personal experience. Kant
would make two uses of the Regimen: he sent it to Hufeland, who
was also given permission to publish it in his Revue, either in full
or in part, with an introduction and commentary; it was also to
become the third part of the Conflict of the Faculties-thereby
creating a systematic whole which would study the relationship
between the Faculty of Philosophy and the three others. Thus a
philosophers personal contribution to the medical enterprise, to
come up with a Regimen, comes to signify, simultaneously and
without having undergone any modification, the debate and the
division between medical science and philosophical reflection over
how to define the everyday art of healthy living.
        In actual fact, what dominates the text is not of the order of a
debate. While the resolution of the "conflict" between the faculties
of philosophy and theology called for nothing less than a Friedensabschluss     the relations between philosophy and medicine were,
at the outset, placid. Medical prescription and philosophical precept fit together spontaneously in the logic of their nature: a moral
and practical philosophy is a Universal medizin in the sense that,
while it cannot meet all needs or serve all purposes, no prescription
is written without one. The fact is, with regard to medicine, a
moral and practical philosophy is the universal negative (it excludes
illness)-which means, with regard to the Regimen, it serves as the
universal positive (it defines the laws of preservation in the play of
health). Philosophy is the element of universality against which the
particulars of medical prescription are always measured: it forms its
unprescribable horizon, taking in both health and illness. To be
sure, this precedence is masked by the immediacy of human wishes: when we wish for a long and healthy life, only the first of those
wishes is unconditional: a sick man pleading for delivrance in death
always calls for a reprieve when the moment inally comes; but
what is unconditional in the register of the wish takes second place
in life: no one dies a natural death when in good health-we might
not feel ill, but still, illness is there. Illness is the indispensable seed
of death. The art of prolonging life is therefore not about scoring
a victory over the absolute of death in the comprehensive mastery
of life; it is, at the very heart of life, the measured and relative art
of managing the relationship between health and illness.
     The meaning of this art is perhaps not best expressed in the idea
of the minds control over pathological sensations. For, sensations
being what they are, only their intensity, and the amount of time we
spend thinking about them, can be controlled: hypochondria is a
form of delirium not in the sense that the "Krankheitsstojf" had failed
it, but in the sense that the imagination projects the play of its illusions upon it and its simple reality. As for the illnesses themselves,
they are susceptible to the mind s control only if they take the form of
spasms. As for the whole of eighteenth century medicine, spasm here
does not refer to the involuntary contraction of a hollow organ but,
more generally, to all forms of inhibition and acceleration (the former
being only the paradoxical effect of the latter) in the natural and regular movements of the organism. Over these movements, or rather
over any changes in these movements, the mind has the power to reintroduce equilibrium: the master of his own thought process is also the
master of this vital movement which is its organic and indispensable
complement. If the mind were immobile, then life would go to
sleep-which is to say that it would die (only it is only because we
dream that we are kept from dying in our sleep); and if the movement
of life risks being thrown off balance, or getting jammed up in a
spasm, then the mind must be able to restore it to its proper mobility.
     Between the text Kant sent to Hufeland and the Anthropology
there is direct communication: they are on the same level. Apart
from the last two paragraphs, every other paragraph of Von der
Macht engages with a theme that is also dealt with in the Anthropology: hypochondria, dreams, eating and digestive problems,
reflections on what time of day is most conducive to thinking. A
long passage on sleep was even deleted from the manuscript of the
Anthropology because it repeated material from the Conflict of the
Faculties. Written at the same time, the two texts issue from the
same vein of thought.
     The research undertaken for Hufeland must have helped Kant
to resolve one of the problems that had been hanging over the
Anthropology: how to articulate an analysis of what the homo natu-
ra is on the basis of man defined as a free subject. In the
Collegentwilrfe from 1770-1780, the problem is conceived either
in terms of a separation: "1. Kenntniss des Menschen als Naturdinges;
2 als sittlichen Wesen"67 or as a circular argument: " Weltkentniss ist
1 Naturkenntniss; 2. Menschenkenntniss; aber der Mensch hat auch
eine Natur.
In the later fragments, we see the solution being
sketched out in terms of a usage {Gebrauch), but the content and
the possibility of such a solution remains unclear:
Die Menschenkenntniss hat die Idee zum Grunde dass wir die Natur zu
unseren Absichten am besten brauchen konnen.        
                                                    
It was not until the Conflict of Faculties and the draft produced in 1797 that the
precise meaning of this Gebrauch would emerge. Here, we see how
the body s movements, however conditioning they may be (of life
and death, awakening and sleeping, thinking and not thinking),
can nevertheless be mastered by the movements of the mind when
exercised freely. The theory of spasms showed how the passive
and spontaneous syntheses of the body could be repeated and
rectified in the voluntary movements of the mind. These, however,
will never achieve their ends, withdrawing into a sovereignity
that would rule over death. And old age is the sign of this, the
necessary decline of that mastery into the spontaneity of the pas-
sive syntheses. Old age is not an illness; rather, it is the state in
which illness can no longer be mastered-where time, once
again, is in control.

We should pause for a moment. And, out of a methodological
concern, pretend to read the Anthropology as if the Critique did
not exist-which is what the text itself invites us to do; at no point
does the 1798 draft presuppose the existence of the Critique.
Could it be that the text engages only with the actuality of the
system of the postcritical period, and is simply weighed down by
memories of the precritical period? A certain number of themes,
in any case, were already in place.
    1) It was not the aim of the anthropological thinking to bring
an end to the definition of a human Wesen in naturalist terms: the

Collegentwiirfe from 1770-80 were already saying that "Wir unter-
suchen hier den Menschen nicht nach dem was er naturlicher
Weise ist." But the Anthropology of 1798 transforms this decision
into an ongoing method, a resolute readiness to follow a path
which, it is clear from the outset, would never lead to the truth
of nature. The initial objective of Anthropology is to be an
Erforschung: an exploration of an ensemble never graspable in its
totality, never at rest, because always taken up in a movement
where nature and freedom are bound up in the Gebrauch-one of
the meanings of which is given in the word usage.
   2) The object of study, then, is not memory as such, but the use
made of it. Not the description of what man is but what he can
make of himself. This theme had no doubt been, from the beginning, the very seed of anthropological reflection, as well as the           
mark of its singularity: wir untersuchen hier den Menschen... um
zu wissen was er aus sich machen und wie man ihn brauchen kann." Such is the programme as it is defined in the Collegentwurfe. In 1798, it has been doubly modified. Anthropology is no
longer interested in finding out how "man can be used," but "what
can be expected of him.      Moreover, it will investigate what man
 can and should make {kann und soil) of himself. Which is to say

that the notion of usage is wrenched from the level of technical
actuality and placed within a double system: of obligation asserted
with regard to oneself, and of distance respected with regard to
others. Usage is inscribed within the text of a freedom postulated
as both singular and universal.
     3) The "pragmatic" character of Anthropology is thereby defined:
according to the Collegentwiirfe, Pragmatisch ist die Erkenntnis
von der sich ein allgemeiner Gebrauch in der Gesellschaft machen
lasst." The pragmatic character was therefore nothing more than the
useful universalized. In the 1798 text, however, it is now a certain
kind of connection between the Konnen and the Sollen. A connection that Practical Reason guaranteed a priori in the Imperative, and
which in anthropological thinking is ensured by the concrete movement of daily exercise: by the Spielen. This notion of Spielen is
singularly important: man is nature s play; it is the game that he
plays, and is played by it; if he is sometimes played with-as when
his senses are deceived-it is because he is playing the victim of the
game, despite it being within his power to be in control, to take
back control by feigning his intention. In this way, the game
becomes a "kiinstlicher Spiel" and the show he puts on receives its
moral justification. Anthropology thus develops on the basis of
this dimension of human exercise that goes from the ambiguity of
the Spiel (game-toy) to the indecision of the Kunst (art-artifice).
     4) The book of daily exercise. Not a theoretical book or a
school textbook. In a text from the years 1780-90, this opposition
is formulated clearly: "Alle Menschen bekommen eine zwiefache
Bildung: 1. durch die Schule; 2. durch die Welt." This opposi-
tion takes form in anthropological teaching-which, after all,
amounts to a kind of schooling-thus giving rise to a fundamental
tension: the progress of culture, in which the history of the world
is summarised, constitutes a school which leads from itself to the
knowledge and the practice of the world. The world being its
own school, the aim of anthropology is to situate man within this
instructive context. It will therefore be both, indissociably: the
analysis of how man acquires the world (his use, rather than his
knowledge of it), which is to say how he manages to take his place
in the world and participate in the game: Mitspielenf and, at the
same time, the synthesis of the prescriptions and rules that the
world imposes on man, which train him, readying him to take con-
trol of the game: das Spiel verstehen. Anthropology is therefore
neither a history of culture nor an analysis of its successive forms,
but the practice, at once immediate and imperative, of a culture
already given in advance. It teaches man to recognise, within his
own culture, what the world teaches him. It has a kinship with
Wilhelm Meister70 to the extent that here, too, we find that the
World is a School. Yet what in Goethe's novel, and in all of the
Bildungsromane, is repeated over the length of a whole story, in the
Anthropology is repeatedly given in the imperious, present, and
forever renewed form of daily application. Time rules here, but in
the synthesis of the present.
       
Here then are a few landmarks, on the same latitude as the
Anthropology, which indicate its particular gradient. Initially, as the
Collegentwurfen attest, it developed in what was the accepted division between nature and man, freedom and use, school and the
world. Now, however, its equilibirum is to be found in the recognition of their unity-a unity which is never again called into
question, at least not on the anthropological level. It explores a
region where freedom and use are already bound together in the
reciprocity of a usage, where what one can do and what one must
do belong together in the unity of a play which measures the one
against the other, where the world becomes a school on the basis of
the prescriptions of a culture. We are touching on the essential
point: in Anthropology, man is neither a homo natura, nor a purely
free subject; he is caught by the syntheses already operated by his
relationship to the world.
     But could the 1798 text have said that which was not yet said
in the Collegentwurfe if the discourse of the Anthropology had
remained foreign to the labor and the language of the Critique.
Something of the knowledge of the world is thus bound up in this
knowledge of man which is anthropology. " Weltkenntniss ist Men-
schenkenntiss as a fragment from the 70-80 period affirms. The
preface to the 1798 text assigns itself the object of man as a citizen
of the world, le Weltbiirger.
    And yet, with the exception of the very last pages, the Anthro-
pology rarely seems to privilege the theme of man living in the
world, of man establishing, through the cosmos, his rights, duties
and reciprocities, the limits and exchanges of his citizenship. This
lacuna is far more apparent in the published text than in the
Nachlass fragments. The majority of the analyses, and virtually all
of those which appear in the first part of the book, are undertak-
en not in the cosmopolitical dimension of the Welt, but that
other-interior-dimension of the Gemut.7] By the way, in this
respect the angle of Anthropology is the same as that already
adopted by Kant when, on the basis of an encyclopaedic organization, he revealed the link between the three Critiques: Die
Vermogen des Gemiits lassen sich namlich insgesamt auf folgen-
den drei zuriickfiihren: Erkenntnissvermogen, Gefiihl der Lust
und Unlust, Begehrungsvermogen. If it is indeed the case that
the Gemiit that is in question in the Anthropology is the principal
element of Kants exploration, then we are justified in asking a
number of questions:
    1) How does the study of the Gemiit involve knowledge of man
as a citizen of the world?

        2) If the fundamental and irreducible faculties of the Gemiit dic-
tate the organization of the three Critiques, and anthropology is, for its
part, an analysis of the Gemiit, then what is the relationship between
anthropological knowledge and critical thought?
     3) What distinguishes the investigation of the Gemiit, and its
faculties, from psychology, whether rational or empirical?
     The texts of the Anthropology and of the Critique ofPure Rea-
son appear to reply to the last question directly-although they do
not give the whole of the answer.
       We are familiar with the distinction established in the Architectonic between rational and empirical psychology.72 The first
belongs to pure philosophy, hence to metaphysics, and so is distinguished from rational physics, as the object of inner sense is
distinguished from the object of outer sense. As for empirical psychology, there is a long tradition of placing it within metaphysics;more importantly, the recent failures of metaphysics have given rise
to the belief that the solution to its irresolvable problems were hid-
den in psychological phemonena pertaining to an empirical study
of the soul; in this way, psychology seized upon a lackluster meta-
physics in which it had already claimed an unwarranted place. In
no circumstances can empirical knowledge provide the principles
or shed light on the fundaments of a knowledge issued from pure
reason which is, as a consequence, entirely a priori. Empirical psychology must therefore be separated from metaphysics, to which it
is foreign. If however such a separation can not be performed
straight away, it is because anthropology had to ready psychology
for its integration into an empirical science of man, which would
then serve as the counterpoint to an empirical science of nature. In
this abstract organization, everything seems clear.
    And yet, the Anthropology, at least in the version available to us,
leaves no room for any kind of psychology whatsoever. It explicitly
refuses psychology by focusing on the Gemiit, and not the explo-
ration of the Seele. But what is it that differentiates the two?

    a) From a formal point of view, psychology postulates an equiv-
alence between inner sense and apperception, and thus fails to
recognise their fundamental difference: apperception is one of the
forms of pure consciousness, and is therefore without content,
defined only by the / think\ inner sense, on the other hand, refers
to a mode of empirical knowledge, that which enables us to appear
to ourselves in an ensemble of phenomena linked by the subjective
condition of time.

    b) From the point of view of content, psychology cannot
avoid getting caught up in the questions of difference and identity:
Does the soul remain the same across time? Is the soul, which

makes of itself a condition of experience, affected by experience,
by the necessarily temporal sequencing of phenomena? In other
words, is the entire reality of the soul given in the dispersion of
phenomena or, on the contrary, in the nonempirical solidity of a
substance? So many questions which together show, in a variety
of different lights, the confusion between the soul (a metaphysical notion of a simple and immaterial substance), the I think'
that is pure form, and the ensemble of phenomena that appear to
inner sense.

    These texts of the Anthropology can be placed in a direct line of
descent from the Transcendental DialecticP What they denounce is
precisely that inevitable illusion" which the paralogisms acknowledge as such: in our definition of the particular object that is the
soul, we make use of the simple representation of the I one that  
is devoid of any content. However, we should note that the par-
alogisms concern only rational, and not empirical, psychology,
which leaves the possibility of a species of the physiology of
inner sense" open-the content of which would depend upon the
conditions of all possible experience. On the other hand, ratio-
nal psychology can and must subsist as a discipline, allowing us
to escape both materialism and spiritualism, beckoning us away
from this speculation and "zum fruchtbarenpraktischen Gebrauch."
As a result, and even though it appears to target all possible forms
of psychology, the Anthropology dismisses only that which had
already been denounced in the Critique of Pure Reason. Without
stating it explicitly, it is with regard to rational psychology that the
Anthropology keeps its distance.
     What then is the relationship between anthropology and the
two further possibilities which this leaves open-an empirical
psychology and a discipline orientated toward practical applica-
tion? Does the Anthropology maintain the virtuality of these still
virtual disciplines, keeping them close by but devoid of content,
or are they taken up in its own movement-or, alternatively, are
they too rejected, and made impossible by the realization74 of the
anthropological program? Two things, at least, are certain: there
is nothing in the text of the Anthropology to indicate that an
empirical psychology or a rational psychology in the form of a

 discipline" could be found elsewhere, whether outside or in the
environs of the Anthropology itself: there is no indication of a vic-
inal exteriority. But, on the other hand, there is not one element,
section, or chapter of the Anthropology which can be identified
with the discipline that the Dialectic had forseen or with the
empirical psychology glimpsed from the summit of the Method-
ology.75 Must we therefore conclude that the Anthropology
constitutes, by a shift in perspectives, both that transcendental
discipline and that empirical knowledge? Or, on the contrary,
that it has made both impracticable, ensuring that neither will
ever get started?
     It is the Gemut7b itself that we must now interrogate. Is it, or
is it not, of the order of psychology?
        It is not Seele.77 On the other hand, it both is and is not Geist.78

Though discrete, the presence of Geist in the Anthropology is nevertheless decisive. In fact, the brief definition provided does not
appear to promise much: Geist ist das belebende Prinzip im Menschen.    A banal sentence, which, in its trivality, sustains the
commonplace expression: Eine Rede, eine Schrift, eine Dame der
Gesellschaft ist schon; aber ohne Geist." To be attributed with
Geist, a person has to arouse interest: "durch Ideen" A little further on, Kant repeats all these suggestions, knitting them together
into a single and enigmatic definition: "Man nennt das durch
Ideen belebende Prinzip des Gemiits Geist."
     Let us take our time over the choice of words. We are dealing
with a Prinzip. Not with a Vermogen such as memory, attention,
or knowledge in general. Nor with one of those powers {Krdfie)
which Kant talks about in the Introduction to the Critique of
Judgement. Nor, finally, is this a simple representation like the

 I pure" from the first Critique. Principle, then: but is it a determining or a regulating principle? Neither the one nor the other, if
are to take the vitalization that is attributed to it seriously. Might
there therefore be something in the Gemut-in the way it orients
experience, or in its virtual totality-which allies it to life and
which has to do with the presence of the Geist? Here, a whole new
dimension is opened out: the Gemut is not only organized by and
armed with the powers and faculties that divide up its domain; the
great tripartite structure, which seemed to be given its definitive
formulation in the Introduction to the Critique ofJudgement, did
not manage to contain that which, of Gemut, can appear in experience. Like every living being, its lifetime is not indifferently
dispersed and scattered; it has its own path to follow; something
in it projects it into, without however it being enclosed within, a
virtual totality.
     In actual fact, we are given no clear indication as to what this
principle might consist in. But what it is possible to grasp is how
this vitalization takes place, the movement by which Geist gives
the mind the figure of life. Durch Ideen says the text. What does
this mean? How can the idea of a necessary concept of reason,
which Kant understands as one to which no congruent object can
be given in the senses," give life to the mind? This could easily be
misinterpreted. We might well think that, in its originary temporal
dispersion, the Gemilt directs itself toward a totalization that would
be effected in and by the Geist. The Gemut would thus owe its life
to this distant, inaccessible, and yet efficient presence. But if that
were the case, then the Geist would be defined from the outset as a
regulating principle and not as a "vitalizing" principle. Further-
more, it would mean that the whole thrust of the Anthropology
would no longer be tending toward the theme of man living in the
world, man as a resident of this cosmopolitical republic with all the
duties and rights that are associated with it. Instead, it would be
oriented toward the theme of a Geist that, little by little, envelops
man-and, with him, the world-with its imperious cloak of spir-
itual sovereignity. It is not the idea of a Geist which guarantees the
regulation of the empirical diversity of the Gemiit, promising it
never-ending life.
          The "durch Ideen            which interests us therefore has another
meaning. The important paragraph of the Critique entitled:                                     On the Final Aim of the Natural Dialectic of Human Reason                                       sheds light on the role that ideas play in the organization of the concrete
life of the mind. For it is in effect that, liberated from its transcendental use and the illusions that it cannot help but give rise to, the
idea acquires its meaning in the plenitude of experience: there, it
anticipates a schema that is not constituting but which opens up
the possibility of objects. It does not reveal the nature of things in
an ostensive gesture; rather, it gives an advance indication of how
nature can be sought. At last demonstrating that the edge of the
universe is beyond the horizon of knowledge, it engages empirical
reason in the serious task of an infinite labour. In other words, as
long as it is experience itself which provides the idea with its field
of application, it enters the mind80 into the mobility of the infinite,
endlessly impelling it to procede still further, 81 though still man-
aging to avoid losing it in an indepassable dispersion. Thus,
empirical reason never reposes idly on the given; and the idea, by
linking it to the infinite and, at the same time, denying it the infi-
nite, gives it life in the realm of the possible. Such then is the
function of the GeisP. it does not organize the Gemiit in such a way
that it is made it into a living being, or into the analogon of organic
life, or indeed into the life of the Absolute itself; rather, its function
is to vitalize, to engender, in the passivity of the Gemiit, which is
that of empirical determination, a teeming mass of ideas-the mul-
tiple structures of a totality in the process of becoming that make
and unmake themselves like so many of the half-lives that live and
die in the mind. Thus the Gemiit is not simply "what it is" but what it makes of itself. And is this not precisely the area of inquiry
that the Anthrolopogy defines as its field of investigation? To which we
only need add that what the Gemiit has to make of himself is the
greatest possible empirical use of reason          use that is to be the
greatest possible thanks to the durch Ideen." The movement which,
in the Critique, gave rise to the transcendental mirage is extended
and prolonged in the Anthropology in the form the empirical, concrete life of the Gemiit.
    From this, a number of consequences arise.
     a) The only possible anthropology is that where, rather than
being tied to the passivity of phenomenal determinations, the Gemiit
is instead animated by the work of ideas on the level of the field of
experience. The Geist is therefore the principle, in the Gemut, of a dedialecticized, nontranscendental dialectic oriented toward the

domain of experience and playing an integral part in the play of phenomena itself. It is the Geist which offers the Gemiit the freedom of
the possible, stripping it of its determinations, and providing it with
a future which it owes to nothing but itself.
     b) We now understand that anthropology renders an empirical
psychology impossible, as well as a knowledge of the mind82 that
could be developed entirely on the level of nature. Without the
  belebendes Prinzip" it would only ever have access to a mind that
is asleep, inert, dead-which would make it a "physiology" minus
the life. The Preface to the 1798 text attests to this: the possibility
of a nonpragmatic anthropology is acknowledged in theory, as
having a place within the general system of knowledge of man. But
while it is announced in the name of a structural symmetry, as a
content of knowledge it is rejected: the study of memory as a simple fact of nature is not only futile, it is impossible: All theoretical
                                                               "

speculation about this is a pure waste of time. The presence of the
 Geist and, with it, this dimension of freedom and of totality which
transcends the Gemut, ensure that the only true anthropology is a
pragmatic anthropology, where each fact is placed within the open
system of Konnen and Sollen. And Kant only wrote one kind.
     c) Given these conditions, might not the Geist have something
to do with this enigmatic nature of our reason, which is also in      




question in the Dialectic and the Methodology of Pure Reason} An
unsettling notion. The movement of the Critique, having reached its
summit, would seem to be sent abruptly back in the direction of the
empirical, toward a realm of facts where man would be entirely
given over to the most originary form of passivity. All of a sudden,
the transcendental would be relieved of its duties, and the conditions of experience finally be brought back to the originary inertia
of a nature. But does this nature of our reason     play the same role
here as the nature of human understanding in Hume, that of the
first explanation and the final reduction? For the moment, let us
simply note a structural analogy between this nature that urges
reason to venture to the outermost bounds of all cognition by
means of mere ideas in a pure use, without itself containing "original deceptions and semblances" (is this not, after all, nature pure
and simple?), and the concrete life of the mind as it is described in
the Anthropology. For it, too, is animated by a spontaneous movement which repeatedly exposes it to the danger of being played by
its own game, but which is always played in an initial innocence.
Both are always on the point of losing, and breaking free from,
themselves but in their proper movement remain nevertheless, the
highest court of appeal for all rights and claims."
     d) If this analogy is well-founded, we are justified in asking
whether the Geist, which emerges within the confines of anthro-
pological reflection, is in fact secretly indispensable to the
structure of Kantian thought; something like the seed of pure rea-
son, the deep-rooted origin of its transcendental illusions, the
infallible judge of its return to its legitimate domain, the principle
of its movement within the empirical field where the faces of truth
ceaselessly appear one after another. The Geist would be that orig-
inary fact which, in its transcendental version, implies that the
infinite is never present, but always in an essential retreat; and, in
its empirical version, that the infinite is what animates the move-
ment toward truth and as the endless succession of its forms. The
Geist is at the root of the possibility of knowledge. And, because
of this, it is indissociably present and absent in the figures of
knowledge: it is this retreat, this invisible and "visible reserve" and
it is in its inaccessible distance that knowledge takes its place and
acquires its positivity. Its mode of being is being not there; in pre-
cisely this, it outlines the place of truth.
     The unique and sovereign structure of this originary fact gives
the necessity of critical thinking and the possibility of Anthropology.

What connections between these two modes of thought warrant
this radical element which appears to be common to both?
     Such is the difference in level between the Critique and the
Anthropology that it initially discourages a structural comparison
between the two. A collection of empirical observations, anthropology is not in contact" with a philosophy of the conditions of
experience. And yet this essential difference is not of the order of a
nonrelation. A certain inverted analogy casts the Anthropology as
the negative of the Critique.
     a) In the Anthropology, the relationships between synthesis and
the given are the mirror-image of how they appear in the Critique.
     Consider subjectivity, for example. As regards anthropology,
Kant spent a long time hestitating over this point. The texts from
the 70-80 period link the expression of the T to the possibility of
being an object for oneself But it is not clear whether it is the T
itself that is at the root of this possibility, or if it is rooted in the
objectification that this possibility enables. The Critique, for its
part, comes to a decision: the T can never be the object, only the form of the synthesis. Now, in the 1798 text, when the T is considered in its fundamental synthetic function, it also assumes the
 simple status of an object. It appears, abruptly assuming a fixed
 form that from then on remains constant in the field of experience.
The impact of the spoken T marks the passage from sentiment to
 thought-from Filhlen to Denken. Without being the agent or sim-
ply the conscious awareness of this passage, it is the empirical and
manifest form in which the synthetic activity of the T appears as a
figure already synthesised-a structure that is at once first and second: it is not given to man from the beginning, as a kind of a priori
of existence; but when it does appear, inscribing itself within the
multiplicity of a chronicle of sensations, it presents itself as already
having been there, like the irreducible content of a thought which
can operate only once that figure of experience is constituted: it is
 in this T that the subject will become aware of its past and carry
out the synthesis of its identity. Put another way, the a priori of
knowledge from the point of view of the Critique cannot immediately be transposed into the a priori of existence in the terms of the
anthropology; it appears in the density of a becoming where its
sudden emergence infallibly assumes the retrospectively constituted meaning of the already there.
     The structure is inverted for the originary dispersion of the
given. From an anthropological perspective, the given is, in effect,
never offered on the basis of an inert multiplicity that is the decisive indication of an originary passivity, and which appeals to the
synthetic activity of consciousness in all of its diverse forms. The
dispersion of the given is always already reduced in Anthropology,
secretly dominated by a whole variety of syntheses operated outside
of the visible work of consciousness: it is the unconscious syntheses of the elements of perception and obscure representations that
even the light of our understanding is not always capable of dissociating; these are the schemas of exploration that trace, in space,
little islands of synthesis; in sensibility, these reorganizations are
what permit the subsitution of one sense for another; these are
the strengthenings and the weakenings of the sensible effects which
anticipate, as it were spontaneously, the voluntary syntheses of
attention. Thus, what in the Critique was welcomed as the infinitely thin surface of a multiplicity which has nothing in common
with itself other than being originarily given, is shown, in Anthropology, in the light of an unexpected depth: as already grouped and
organized, as having already been given the provisional or solid figures of synthesis. That which, for consciousness, is the pure given,
does not present itself as such in concrete existence. For an anthropology, absolutely originary passivity is never there.
     Thus, the structure of the relationship between the given and
the a priori in Anthropology is the opposite of that revealed in the
Critique. The a priori, in the order of knowledge, becomes, in the
order of concrete existence, an originary which is not chronologically first, but which, having appeared in the succession of figures
of the synthesis, reveals itself as already there; on the other hand,
that which, in the order of knowledge, is a pure given, is, in the
reflection on concrete existence, lit up by muted lights which give
it the depth of the already occured.
     b) Anthropology maintains the division of the "faculties"-Vermogen-as in the Critique. However, its privileged domain is not
that where the faculties and powers show off their positive attributes
but where they show their failings-or at least where they face
danger, where they risk being obliterated. Rather than their nature
or the full form of their activity, anthropology is concerned with
pointing up the movement by which the faculties, distancing them-
selves from their center and their justification, become other than
themselves, illegitimate. In line with its fundamentally propedeutical aim, no doubt the Critique sought to denounce and to dismantle
the transcendental use of reason simply by constantly referring to the
positive aspects of each Vermogen. In anthropological investigation,
however, the pursuit of each faculty takes the path of all possible
deviation. Self-awareness, for example, is defined not as a form of
experience and the condition of a limited but grounded knowledge;
instead, it looks more like the always resurgent temptation of a polymorphous egoism: the possibility of saying T gives consciousness
the allure of a             
beloved Me" which fascinates it to the extent that,
in a paradoxical return, it renounces the language of the first person as decisive as it had nevertheless been-so as to reproduce
itself in the fiction of an 'Us.' The study of sensibility, while repeating the great critical opposition between Schein and Erscheinung,
does not investigate what grounds this phenomenon; instead, it
explores that which is at once fascinating and precarious in the dazzle of appearance: how it veils what it makes sparkle, and at what
point it happens to convey what it unveils. The extended analysis
of the deficiencies and illnesses of the mind prompts a brief para-
graph on reason; and we only have to look at how mental
pathology is accorded increasing importance in the notes and the
other projects that led up to the fully developed 1798 text to see
how these reflections on negativity were moving in the same direction as the anthropological research. To critical thought, which
represents the investigation into that which is conditional in the
founding activity, Anthropology responds by offering an inventory of
what is un-founded in the conditioned. In the anthropological
domain, there is no synthesis that it is not under threat: it is as if the
realm of experience were hollowed out from within by dangers which
are not of the order of some arbitrary going beyond, but of collapse.
    Possible experience, in its limited range, defines the field of the
loss of truth with as much success as it does the field of truth.

    c) At last, a detail acquires its significance. All the Collegentwiirfe and the-fairly late-text published by Starke give the
general plan of the Anthropology as divided into two parts: an Elementarlehre and a Methodenlehre. The 1798 text is in effect divided
into two sections, but one is a Didactic and the other a Characteristic. This change, which was no doubt made in the years leading
up to the publication of the book, is all the more surprising given
that the content and the order do not seem to have undergone any
modification whatsoever. The distinction between a doctrine of

the elements and a doctrine of the method is in keeping with the
critical research: on the one hand, that which constitutes the faculty of knowledge, and on the other, that which governs its
exercise in the realm of possible experience. Apparently, the
Anthropology is built on the same model: first come the diverse faculties, the organization of which forms the totality of the
Gemut (the Elementarlehre); then, the rules governing their exercise for an individual, a family, within a population or a race, and
at the heart of humanity (the Methodenlehre). But this is merely a
trompe Voeil-an adjustement to the norms of the Critique which
was not in keeping with the vocation of the text.
     The terms Didactic and Characteristic which appear at the very
last stage of reflection, and which are therefore the substitutes for
the traditional distinction, are accompanied by curious subtitles
whose relationship to the titles is difficult to fathom. For the
Didactic it is a question of "the Way of Cognizing the Interior as
Well as the Exterior of the Human Being,"85 and for the Characteristic, the Way of cognizing the Interior of the Human Being
from the Exterior." Is this change a reorganization of the whole, a
move away from critical thought? No, indubitably. Rather, it is the
discovery of that which was already, obscurely, and prior to any
explanation, the thematic of the Anthropology, that is, the direct
coordination which ensures that research into the field of the
Gemut leads to an interior knowledge of the self, but also that it
overflows spontaneously, and without recourse to the limit or any
further extrapolation into the knowledge of man in the exterior
forms by which he is manifested. For as long as the term Elementarlehre was imposed by the symmetry of the Critique, the analysis
of the Gemut could only make sense of itself under the auspices
of an investigation into the powers in the virtuality of the Vermogen, and at the root of the possible. But, once it was free to assume
its true meaning, that investigation knew that, by concerning itself
with the interior, it engages with the exterior at the same time; that
man does not make anything of his possibilities without also being
engaged in their manifestations. What the Critique discerned as the
possible in the order of the conditions (Vermogen) and the real in
the order of the constituted (Erscheinung) is given in Anthropology
as an indivisable continuity: the secret of Power reveals itself in the
dazzle of the Phenomenon, where it finds both its truth and the
truth of its perversion (when use becomes abuse, as in the language
of the first person); and Power, in its perversion, is denounced by
the Phenomenon, which then imperiously calls Power back to this
radical truth which links Power to itself in the mode of obligation.
It is this that gives each paragraph of the First Part its obscure
three-beat rhythm: Power at the root of its possibilities; Power
found then lost, translated and betrayed in its Phenomenon; Power
linked imperatively to itself. So, for example: self-consciousness,
egoism, the effective consciousness of representations; or, imagination as the power of originary invention," imagination in the
fantastical shipwreck of the dream, imagination in poetry linked to
the sign. Or, again: the power to desire with ones emotions; the
false truth of the passions; the place of sovereign good. What links
the Vermogen to the Erscheinung is both of the order of a manifestation, of venturing as far as perdition, and of an ethical bond.
There, precisely, lies the articulation of the Konnen and the Sollen
which, as we have seen, is indispensable to anthropological
thought. The art of knowing the interior as well as the exterior of
man is therefore not, strictly speaking, a theory of elements but a
Didactic: it does not discover without teaching and prescribing. As
for the Characteristic, it shows that the ensembles of phenonemathe body, the couple, the race, the species-are not closed in upon
themselves, given once and for all, but are what relates the apparently immobile truths of phenomena back to those radical
possibilities that gave them meaning and movement; it allows us to
go from the sign back to the power, das Innere des Menschen aus
dem Ausseren zu erkennen?

    The critical model, having imposed itself for so long, is succeeded by an articulation which repeats it, but as in a negative:the theory of the elements becomes a prescription with respect to
all possible phenomena (which, strictly speaking, was the goal of
the Methodenlehre)?1 Conversely, the theory of the method
becomes a regressive analysis that aims to uncover to the primitive seed of the powers (which was the intention of the
Elementarlehre) A repetition, then, but back-to-front, as in a
mirror. This is how close, and, at the same time, how distant the
region where the a priori of knowledge is defined is from the
domain specifying the a prioris of existence. That which is
announced in the order of conditions appears, in the form of the
originary, as both same and other.

If this distant proximity is to be seen more clearly, it is all the more
urgent that we discover what relationship the Anthropology bears to
the Critique.
     Two texts are of singular importance: a passage from the
Transcendental Method, to which we have already referred with
regard to psychology; and a fairly enigmatic piece of evidence
from the Logic.
     1) The Architectonics ofPure Reason. Pure philosophy (in which,
as a propedeutics, the Critique is included), makes no room for
anthropology. Rational physiology," which thinks of Nature as the
Inbegriff aller Gegenstdnde der Sinne knows only physics and rational psychology. On the other hand, in the vast field of empirical
philosophy, two domains balance each other out: that of physics,
and that of an anthropology whose task it is to take in the smaller
edifice of an empirical psychology.
     At first glance, there appears to be no rigorous symmetry between
pure philosophy and empirical philosophy. The correspondence
 that is immediately evident with regard to physics stops short
 when it is a question of inner sense and the human being. Unlike
 psychology, anthropology is only ever on the side of empirical
 philosophy; it cannot therefore be governed or controlled by the
 Critique, inasmuch as the latter is concerned with pure reason.
 No more than the construction of Newtonian physics required
 or needed to be verified by critical philosophy, Anthropology, taking
 up the place set aside for it by the Architectonic, has no need of
 a preliminary critique. Hence, there is no possibility of the Critique holding any sway over the form or the content of the
Anthropology. Between the one kind of thinking and the other,
 there is no contact whatsoever. Is not all of this in any case confirmed (negatively) by the Anthropology itself? At no point is the
 Critique invoked: the correspondences between the two texts
might be easy to discern, but at no point are they given or conceived as such. It is buried inside the text of Anthropology,
serving as its framework, and it should be envisaged in this way:
as a structural fact, not as the manifestation of a preconceived
and intentional plan.
     2) The Logic. We are familiar with the three fundamental questions enumerated in the Transcendental Method: What can I
know?-a speculative question to which the Critique responds
 that which reason ought to be satisfied with ; What should I
do?-a practical question; What may I hope for?-a question that
is at once theoretical and practical. Now, these three questions
which hang over and, up to a certain point, dictate the organization of the Critique, reappear at the beginning of the Logic, but
having undergone a decisive change. A fourth question is added:
What is man?-a question which follows on from the first three
only to gather them together in a single frame of reference: for all
of the questions must come ultimately down to this, as must
anthropology, metaphysics, morality and religion.
    Is this sudden movement, which reorients the first three questions, pointing them in the direction of anthropology, the sign of a
rupture in Kants thinking? The Philosophieren seems to be entirely
engaged on the level of the knowledge of man; the important
empirical status that the first Critique assigned to Anthropology is,
therefore, challenged-this is no longer the last empirical degree of
a philosophically organized knowledge, but the point at which
philosophical reflection culminates in an interrogation of the questions themselves. But we should be careful not to rush either into
condemning a supposed rupture impacting on the transcendental
resolution of criticism, or into celebrating the discovery of a hypothetical new dimension through which Kant would finally approach
what was, originarily, closest to him.
     First of all, what does it mean for the three questions to "relate to
the fourth (sich beziehen aufy. Are we to understand that relationship
in terms of that between knowledge and the object, or that same
knowledge and the subject-if, as a text from the Logic still has it,
knowledge has "eine zwiefache Beziehung: erstlich, eine Beziehung auf
das Objekt, zweites eine Beziehung aufdas Subjekt." In other words,
are we to understand that, in these three questions, man was the
obscure Gegenstand"-they opened onto him, and he stood before
them, poised to provide the unexpected response they had been
solliciting in another language? Or, on the contrary, is it that thesethree questions must in turn be interrogated, their questioning power
turned back on itself and restored, by way of a new Copernican
revolution, to an originary gravitation around man, who naturally
believes that he is being questioned, when all the while it is he who is
asking the questions, which involves doing away with all philodoxy
and asking the questions with regard to himself Let us begin our
investigation by noting that the Anthrotopology as we know it does not
at any point present itself as a response to the fourth question, nor
even as the greatest empirical exploitation of this very question; in
fact, that question is asked much later, in another context, from a
point of view that is not properly anthropological, and only once the
organization of the Philosophieren in Kantian thought is complete which is to say, in the Logic and in the Opus Postumum.
     It is in the light of the answers provided in these texts to Was ist
der Mensch? that, working backwards, we will try to understand the
meaning ofAnthropology.
     The texts of the Opus Postumum which date from the period
1800-1 endlessly repeat the question of how, with regard to the division of transcendental philosophy, to define the relations between God,
world, and man. And what might look to us like a rupture or a discovery in the Logic, now shows itself to be the fundamental question of
philosophical reflection, taken up again both in the rigour of its limitations and in its widest possible sense. This point is made in one of
the fragments: System der Transc. Philosophic in drei Abschnitten: Gott,
die Welt, universum, und Ich selbst der Mensch als moralisches Wesen."
But these three notions are not given as the three elements of a
planned system that would juxtapose them on a basis of a homogenous plane. The third term is not there as a complement, a third part
in the organization of the whole; rather, it plays the central role as a
 Medius terminus" It is the concrete and active unit in which and by
which God and the world acquire their own, respective unity: Gott,
die Welt, und der Mensch als Person, d. i. als Wesen das diese Begriffe
vereinigt We should allow the fragments that make up the Opus
Postumum their exploratory character and, in the obsessive repetition
of the same themes, listen out for this divergence which is at one with
the originary unity of the undertaking. This Vereinigung of God and of
the world in man and by man-what does it really mean? What syn-
thesis or operation is it aiming at? On what level can it be situated: the
empirical or the transcendental, the originary or the fundamental?
     a) Some texts refer to it as the very act of thinking. If man gives
unity to the world and to God, it is in the sense that he exercises
his sovereignity as a thinking subject-thinking the world and
thinking God: Der medius terminus... ist hier das urteilende Subjekt (das denkende Welt Wesen, der Mensch.. .).                
     b) This act of unification is therefore the synthesis of thought
itself. But it can, in precisely this sense, be defined on the basis of
  the power from which it originates: Gott und die Welt, und der
 Geist des Menschen der beide denki'; or be just as well considered
in its single form, as if God, the world and man, in their co-exis-
tence and their fundamental relations, put the very structure of
judgement back under the regime of traditional Logic; the trilogy
Subjekt, Praedikat, Copula defines the form of what relates God, the
world and man. It is therefore the copula, the link-like the verb
 to be in the judgement of the universe.

     c) At last man emerges as universal synthesis, forming a real
unity in which the personality of God and the objectivity of the
world are rejoined, the sensible principle and the supra sensible;
and man becomes the mediatory from which ein absoluter Ganze                             
takes shape. It is from the starting point of man that the absolute
can be thought.
     Responses-or solutions? These texts should not be read as
either the one or the other. Rather, as possible, and tested, paths for
a mode of thinking advancing across the ground of a transcenden-
tal philosophy at last regained. And, at each point, so as to get the
bearings of this new territory, the question of man arises, as if it
were the question to which every problematic of the world and of
God cannot help but be related.
     But this relation to the question of man does not have the
value of an absolute reference-which would free up a serenely
fundamental thinking. The very content of the question Was ist
der Mensch? cannot inhere in an originary autonomy, for man
immediately defines himself as a citizen of the world, as "Weltbewohner :       Der Mensch gehort zwar mit zur Welt" And,
 completing the circle, all reflection on man involves reflection on
the world. However, at issue here is not the naturalist perspective
where a science of man implies a knowledge of nature. What is in
question are not the determinations, on the level of phenomena,
in which the human animal is caught and defined; rather, it is the
development of self-awareness and of the 'I am': the subject self-
affecting by the movement in which he becomes aware of himself
as an object: Ich bin.-Es ist eine Welt ausser mir {praeter me)
im Raume und der Zeit, und ich bin selbst ein Weltwesen; bin
mir jenes Verhaltnisses bewusst90 und der bewegenden Krafte zu
Empfindungen (Wahrnehmungen).-Ich der Mensch bin mir
selbst ein ausseres Sinnenobjekt, ein Teil de Welt. It is in the          
implications of'I am' that the world is discovered-as the figure
of this movement through which the self, in becoming an object,
takes its place in the ield of experience and finds there a concrete
system of belonging. The world thus revealed is therefore not the
Physis, nor the realm of the validity of laws. And, in fact, while
the discovery of this world just so happened to be anticipated and
made possible by the Transcendental Analytic and the Refutation
of Idealism, it is not exactly this world-or rather, it is not the
world in the same sense-that is in question in the fragment of
the Opus Postumum. The exterior things of the Refutation of
Idealism were the condition of the determination of time as a
form of inner experience: the world of the Opus Postumum is
the concomitant of the determination of the self as the objective
content of experience in general. And rather than being defined by
 persistence, the "obstination" {Beharrliches) of a spatial coexis-
tence, it emerges in the curve of a whole which means, for the
experience of the self, it serves more as a blanket covering than a
landmark. It is no longer the correlative of a Zeitbestimmung, but
the presupposition of a Sinnenbestimmung of the self. It is not
given in the ouverture of the Alk it is present in the curve of the
Ganz inclining back toward itself
     It is not easy to speak of this world. Its realization in the curve
which contains it seems to exclude it from language, and from its
initial form which is that of a prediction: a text in the Opus Postumum speaks of personality as being the predicate of God; but it
stumbles over that which, for the sake of symmetry, ought to be the
predicate of the world. This predicate remains a blank, beyond lan-
guage, because the world, as a whole (Ganz), is beyond all
predication and is perhaps even at the root of all predicates. And yet
the world is not without structure or meaning. Its opposition to the
universe determines its meaning in a transcendental philosophy
     1) Unlike the universe, the world is given in a system of actu-
ality which envelops all real existence. It envelops that existence
both because the world is the concept of its totality, and because all
existence develops its concrete reality on the basis of the world.
This double meaning is implied in the word Inbegriff: "Der Begriff
der Welt ist der Inbegriff des Daseins" The world is the root of exis-
tence, the source, which, containing existence, manages both to
retain it and to set it free.
     2) By definition, there can only be one universe. On the other
hand, though, there could be a number of different worlds ("es mag
viele Welte sein ) The universe is the unity of the possible, while the
world is the system of real relations. Once this system is given,
there is no question of those relations being otherwise; that said,
there is nothing to prevent us conceiving of another system where
other relations might be differently defined. Which is to say that
the world is not the open space of the necessary, but a domain in
which a system of necessity is possible.
      3) But, to allow for such speculation {"es mag..."), it first has
to be acknowledged that there can only ever be one world: Es
mag9] nur Eine Welt sein For the possible is thinkable only from
within a given system of actuality, and the plurality of worlds is
only ever seen from the standpoint of the existing world and whatever available experience we have of it: the world is the Ganze aller
moglichen Sinnen Gegenstdnden.  The corollary of the possibility of conceiving of other worlds-this one being, de facto, only a
domain-is the impossibility of moving beyond the world we
inhabit and the imperious necessity of accepting its frontiers as lim-
its. Thus the world, once again taken to mean the "Inbegriff des
Daseins" appears on the basis of the three-way structure, in keeping with the Begrifdes Inbegriffsy of source, domain, and limit. Such,
according to the Opus Postumum, is the world in which man
appears to himself.
    Now, let us return to the Logic, taking up the thread at the
point where we left off, the moment when the three questions
were referred back to the fourth. What is man? For its part, this
question does not remain stable in the face of, nor is it closed off
from, the void that it defines and interrogates. As soon as it is for-
mulated, the Was ist der Mensch? gives rise to three further
questions-or, rather, to the formulation of three imperatives of
knowledge which together give the anthropological question its
character of a concrete prescription: Der Philosoph muss also
bestimmen konnen:
       1   Die Quellen des menschlichen Wissens
       2   Der Umfang des moglichen und natiirlichen Gebrauches
alles Wissens
       3 Und endlich die Grenzen die Vernunft."

     The question of man is shared between these three prescriptions; what do they mean, and to what do they refer? It is not hard
to find, implicit in these three themes, both the repetition of the
first three questions and the sketch of what in the Opus Postumum
will become the basic structure of the Inbegriff des Daseins" On
 the one hand, establishing the sources of human knowledge
effectively gives the content of the question What can I know?";
determining the "domain of the natural and possible use of knowledge indicates what a possible response to the question "What
should I do? might be; and establishing the "limits of reason"
gives meaning to that which one may hope for.
     Once the content of the fourth question has been specified, we
see that it is not fundamentally different to the meaning of the first
three. Moreover relating to theses three to the last does not mean that
they will be dissolved by it, nor that they refer to a new question
which goes beyond them; it simply means that the anthropological
question asks, by repeating them, the questions that relate to it. We
are at the level of the structural foundation of the anthropologico-
critical repetition. The Anthropology says nothing other than what is
said in the Critique-, we need only glance through the 1798 text to
see that it covers exactly the same ground as the critical enterprise.
     However, the meaning of this fundamental repetition must not
be asked of the words that are repeated nor of the language that
repeats, but instead of that toward which the repetition is directed.
Which is to say, of the revelation of that three-beat structure which
is in question in the Opus Postumum and which characterises the
Inbegriffdas Daseins: source, domain, limit. These concepts are common to the themes that specify the fourth question in the Logic, as                        
well as to those which, in Kant s last texts, give meaning to the notion
of the world as a whole. These are the concepts which determine the
structural connection between the question of man and the world
called into question. And this, through the rigorous repetition of the
three questions that had governed the three Critiques. In other words,
these three notions, Quellen, Umfang, and Grenzen, already present in
the fabric of critical thought, manage, thanks to their perserverance
and their proper weightiness, to reach that fundamental level where
the Inbegriff of existence is interrogated and where they at last
appear in their own right. On the most superficial level, they pre-
sent themselves as the common forms of both the question of man
and of the meaning of the world. On that level of transcendental
philosophy, though, they no doubt have quite another significance.

      Was notwendig (ursprunglich) das Dasein der Dingen ausmacht
gehdrtzur Transc. Philosophies Now, what belongs necessarily (originarily) to the existence of things is the foundational structure of its
Inbegriff that we are already familiar with. The richness of the
source, the solidity of the domain, the rigour of the frontier all
belong to what is necessary (that is to say, originary) for all existence
conceived as Ganz92 and not as AIL97' And it is in this way that the
connection between man and the world is revealed in its most fundamental form-this connection which appeared to be caught in an
infinite repetition of a circularity: because man gives unity to the
world, himself nothing more than a citizen of the world. Does not
a text from the Opus Postumum say that Der Mensch in der Welt
gehort mit zur Kenntniss der Welt?            

    But these are paradoxes only on the level of natural knowledge.
On the level of a transcendental philosophy, they quickly dissolve,
making way for a correlation where the whole of existence defines
what belongs to it necessarily and originarily.
     1) The world, as source of knowledge, is given in those forms
of multiplicity that designate the originary passivity of sensibility;
but the world is precisely the inexhaustible source of knowledge in
the sense that this originary passivity is indissociable from the
forms of the Vereinigung and the spontaneity of the mind. If the
world is source, it is because there is a fundamental correlation,
beyond which we cannot go back any further, between passivity
and spontaneity.
     2) As the domain of all possible predicates, the world is given
as bound up with a determinism which relates to the a priori syntheses of the judging subject { eines urteilenden Subjekts ) And                    .
because of precisely this, the world is a domain only in relation to
a founding activity which initiates freedom; in consequence of
which der Mensch gehort zwar mit zur Welt, aber nicht der seiner
Pflicht Angemessene. "
     3) As the limit of possible experience, the world excludes all
transcendental use of the idea. But it is a limit only because a certain nature of reason exists whose work it is to anticipate the
totality, and think of it precisely as a limit, because the very ambiguity of this notion is to designate both the frontier too easily
crossed and that inaccessible term that we always approaching, but
never actually go beyond. Ambiguity which is expressed in this
fragment: " Gott iiber mir, die Welt ausser mir, der Menschliche Geist
in mir in einem System das All der Dinge befassend. ..."
     We see the expanse of the field of reflection that these three
notions-source, domain, limit-cover. In a sense, they correspond to the trilogy, internal to the first Critique, of sensibility,
understanding, and reason. Further on, they rehearse and summarise the work of each Critique in a single word: pure reason,
practical reason, faculty of judgement. They repeat the three fundamental questions that, according to Kant, aminate all the
Philosphieren. They at last provide the question of man (to which
all the other questions related) with a three-fold content. But, taking
up each of the tripartitions again this way, they are made to
reach, by way of their very repetition, the fundamental level, and
the systematic divisions between them are replaced by their transcendental equivalents. Thus it becomes clear that the world is not
simply source for a sensible faculty/ but the basis of the transcendental correlation of passivity-spontaneity; that the world is not
simply domain for a synthetic understanding, but the basis of the
transcendental correlation necessity-liberty; that the world does
not simply impose a limit on the use of Ideas, but is the basis of the
transcendental correlation reason-mind {Vernunft-Geist). And, in
this way, this system of correlations serves as the basis for the reciprocal transcendence of truth and freedom.
    We see what place is given to the fourth question in the economy of the final episode of Kantian thought, which is to say in the
passage from a critical-hence necessarily propedeutic-reflection to
the realization of a transcendental philosophy. The anthropological
question has no independent content of its own; it repeats the first
three questions, but it repeats them by substituting a tripartition that
was more or less directly lifted from the division of the faculties {Vermogen) with the play of the three notions that cover the whole field
of connections between man and the world. Not empirical and circular connections between immanences on the level of natural
knowledge, but the necessary-that is to say, the originary,
notwendig (ursprunglich)-correlations from which, from the root of
the existence of things, inseparable transcendences emerged.
    The meaning and function of the question What is man? is to
carry the divisions of the Critique to the level of a fundamental
cohesion: that of a structure, more radical than any possible faculty lends itself to transcendental philosophy, liberated at last.

And yet we have not reached the end of the road. Or rather, we have
already gone too far down the path which was supposed to lead us the
exact position ofAnthropology-to its birth-place and to the moment
it inserted itself into critical thought. As if an anthropology only
looked possible (not only its programmatic but also its fundamental
possibility) from the standpoint of the Critique having already
reached its end, having already led to the realization of transcendental philosophy. But there is still further to go: the question What is
man? presents itself in the Logic as the anthropological question par
excellence. And yet, in the Opus Postumum, it is linked, from the very
beginning, to the interrogation of God and the world; the question
is fully developed on this level, as if it had nothing to do with the sin-
gular domain that is anthropology. The reference in the Logic to an
anthropology that would bring all philosophical interrogation back
to itself appears to have been no more than a fleeting episode in
Kantian thought. An episode situated between an anthropology that
has no pretentions to such universal meaning, and a transcendental
philosophy which takes the question of man to another, far more
radical level. This episode was structurally necessary: its transcient
character is linked to the transition that it made possible.
      The relationship between the 1798 text and the Critique is
therefore paradoxical. On the one hand, the Critique announces
and makes space for anthropology at the heart of an empirical phi-
losophy; the Anthropology, for its part, makes no reference to the
Critique or to the organizing principles that it sets out. On the
other hand, the Anthropology repeats the general articulations of the
Critique, as well as the now traditional division of the faculties, as
if it went without saying that it should do so; and yet, despite this
implict and constant reference to the Critique, the latter has no
foundational value with regard to the Anthropology. The Anthropology
 rests on the Critique but is not rooted in it. It inclines spontaneously toward that which must serve as its foundation: not
 critical, but transcendental philosophy itself. It is there that we will
 discover the structure and the function of its empiricity.
      We must now pursue this empiricity for its own sake. From
what we have managed to glimpse of the direction in which it is
 heading, doubtless this question will help us to better understand
 how Anthropology could have been marginal with regard to the Critique and yet decisive for the forms of reflection that came after it.
      The Anthropology describes itself as both "systematic and popular ; and it is by unpacking these two words that we will be able
to decipher its true meaning: to repeat the Critique on the popular' level of advice, narrative and example, and so to secretly set
 Kantian thought on the path toward a founding philosophy.
      1) The Anthropology is systematic. This does not mean that it
states everything one could possibly know about man but that, as
knowledge, it forms a coherent whole: not a Alles but ein GanzesP
 Now, the principle of this totality is not man himself, taken as an
 already coherent object because he is linked to the world. Only the
 undefined work of investigation and frequentation {Umgang) can
find out what he is. If the Anthropology is systematic it is in the sense
 that it borrows its coherence from the whole of the critical enterprise:
 the three books of the Didactic repeat those of the three Critiques,
while the Characteristic reproduces the texts on history, the future of
 humanity and its progress towards unknowable ends. In this, and
 only this, resides the organizing principle of anthropology.
      An example will show precisely how this repetition works. The
 text entitled Apologyfor Sensibility repeats the connections between

intuition and understanding. But this repetition is not a return to
the same. The relationship described by Anthropology has its proper
dimension in the slow, precarious and always doubtful work of
succession: multiplicity, as it is given to the senses, is not yet (noch
nicht) ordered; in addition, understanding is required (hinzukom-
meri), which must instate the order it brings {hineinbringen). A
judgement reached in advance of this ordering (zuvor) risks being
false. On the other hand, this sequence cannot be extended indefi-
nitely; with time, the retrospective mulling over of reasoning
(Nachgriibeln) and the vague movement of reflection {Uberlegung)
may intervene, but error can creep in at this stage too. The given is
therefore never deceptive, not because man judges well, but because
he does not judge at all, for judgement comes with time, and
becomes truth only as time goes on.
     The time of the Critique, a form of intuition and inner sense,
presents the multiplicity of the given only through a constructive
activity that is already at work; it gives diversity, but as already contained in the unity of the I think." In contrast, the time of the
Anthropology is assured by a dispersion which cannot be contained,
for it is no longer that of the given and passive sensibility; we are
dealing with the dispersion of the synthetic activity with regard to
itself-dispersion with which it can "Play" as it were. The synthetic activity is not contemporaneous with itself in the organization of
multiplicity; it never fails to follow on from itself, thus laying itself
open to error, and all the other unsettling slippages iyexkunsteln,
vtrdichten, YZtriichen). While the time of the Critique assured the
unity of the originary (from the originarily given to the originary
synthesis), thus inhering in the dimension of the Ur..., that of the
Anthropology is rooted in the realm of the Ver...-and this, because
it maintains the dispersion of syntheses as well as the always
renewed possibility of seeing them elude one another.96 Time is not
that in which, through which, and by which synthesis is achieved; it
wears away the synthetic activity itself. Time affects it, however, not
as a given indicating an initial passivity, but as an intrinsic possibility, which raises the hypothesis and the hypothec of an
exhaustive determination: the possibility of error is linked to the
duty, and to the freedom, to avoid it. That which affects the synthetic activity gives it access to freedom; that which limits it, places
it, by that very fact, in an undefined field. In the Critique, time
made itself transparent to a synthetic activity which was not in
itself temporal, because it was constitutive; in the Anthropology,
time, mercilessly dispersed, serves to obscure, rendering the syn-
thetic acts impenetratable, and swaps the sovereignity of the
Bestimmmung7 for the patient, brittle uncertainty under threat
from an exercise called Kunst.

       The word Kunst and its derivatives {verkiinsteln, erkunsteln,
gekunstelt) is a term that is often used in the Anthropology-and
among the most resistant to translation. No art, no technique is
meant by it; rather, it refers to the fact according to which nothing
is ever given without being at the same time exposed to the dangers
of an undertaking which both grounds it in construction and flings
it into the arbitrary. The Kunst is in one sense the negation of
originary passivity, but this negation can and must be understood
as spontaneity (with regard to the determinations of diversity) as
much as it is artifice (with regard to the solidity of the given); its role
is as much to construct an illusion (Schein) on top of and facing
the phenomenon (Erscheinung), as it is to give that illusion the
plenitude and the meaning of a phenomenon: which is to say that
the Kunst restrains-but in the form of freedom-the reciprocal
power of negation of the Schein and the Erscheinung. And even the
layers buried deepest within the originary passivity, even that which
is most given in the sensible given, are open to this play of freedom:
the content of sensible intuition can be used artificially as Schein,
and that Schein can be used intentionally as Erscheinung Thus, in
the exchange of the signs of morality, the sensible content can
either be nothing more than a mask offering its services to the ruses
of deception or, alternatively, the ruse of the ruse, the refined facade
which conveys the value and, through the simplicity of an illusion,
the importance of the phenomenon.
    The Kunst which, at the very foundation of the sensible,
already inhabits the whole of the realm of the given, exercises its
control in three different ways: as the power of the negative, as the
decision of the intentional, as the language of exchange. Thus time,
which wears away at the unity of the synthetic act, binding it to a
multiplicity, where it will never retrieve its unity in an intemporal
sovereignity, opens by this very fact it up to a freedom which is all
about exercising negation, giving meaning, establishing communication a dangerous freedom which relates the work of truth to
the possibility of error, and in this way manages to keep the relationship to truth from the sphere of determinations.
    The relationship between time and the subject, which was fundamental in the Critique> in the Anthropology becomes the
relationship between time and Kunst. In the Critique, the subject
was aware of itself as determined in time" and this insurmountable
determination referred to the existence of an exterior world with
regard to which an internal experience of change was possible;
which is to say that time, and the initial passivity that it indicates,
was at the root of this Beziehung auf that characterizes the first
opening of all knowledge. In the Anthropology, time and the dis-
persion that it determines reveal, in the texture of the Beziehung
aufi a reciprocal belonging to truth and freedom. From the Critique to the Anthropology-is it not the same thing that gets
repeated? Time harbours and reveals a relationship to..., a first
opening which is, equally, and at the same time, a bond between
truth and freedom-a bond which will, in turn, become the privileged theme of transcendental philosophy and the interrogation
which animates the endlessly repeated question of the Opus Postumum: Was ist der Mensch? And just as the Beziehung auf became
discernible in the Critique through the structure of the Vorstellung,
so the link between truth and freedom begins to show itself in the
Anthropology through the work and the perils of Kunst.
    The Anthropology is systematic. Systematic in virtue of a
structure which is that of the Critique, and which it repeats. But
what the Critique presents as determination in the relationship
between passivity and spontaneity, in the Anthropology is
described as a temporal dispersion which will never end and has
never begun; what concerns anthropology is always already there,
and never entirely given; what comes first for anthropology is
bound up with a time which in any case envelops it from a distance. It is not that the problem of the origin is unknown to it;
on the contrary, it gives the problem back its true meaning, which
is not to reveal and to isolate the first time in a single instant, but
to recover the temporal framework that, having already begun, is
no less radical. The originary is not the really primitive, it is the
truly temporal. That is, it is at the point where, in time, truth and
freedom are bonded. There could be a false anthropology-we
know all too well what that would look like: it would attempt to
go back to a beginning, to an archaism of fact or law, to the structures of the a priori. Kant s Anthropology teaches us another
lesson: repeat the a priori of the Critique in the originary, that is,
in a truly temporal dimension.
2) Despite the rootedness of its system, the Anthropology is a "popular work, where "examples can be found by every reader." What
are we to understand by this term? Not a certain kind of content
(an empirical analysis cannot but be popular), nor a certain quality of form (a difficult type of knowledge can be dressed up in such
a way so as to make it more accessible). A text from the Logic lends
its status to the notion of Popularitdt. With regard to knowledge,
it is not an addition, an epithet, or a style of expression: it is a
kind of perfection: ... "eine wahrhaft populdre Vollkommenheit des
Erkenntnisses."9 It is to be distinguished from technical or scholastic perfection: it is not that they are incompatible, on the
contrary, it is that the notion of Popularitdt adds something
more. In scholastic discourse, we can never be sure whether or not
the proof is einseitig      in popular knowledge, on the other
hand, there is an exigency which directs it toward the whole,
toward exhaustiveness; it does away with the danger of partiality,
  and thereby authorizes einer vollstdndige Einsicht.   Its proper              
character is thus to be found less in the particularity of a style than
in the way in which proof is presented; its arguments are not better (nor worse) than those of scholastic learning-its truth is the
same, but with the certainity that the whole is given in the inexhaustible multiplicity of diversity. The various proofs that it offers
never give the impression of being biased. Which is just what Kant
meant: the reader finds himself in a climate of such total evidence
{vollstdndige Einsicht) that he is able to find an unlimited number
of new examples.
     But "popular knowledge" is not the i    first, the earliest, nor the
most naive form of truth.

     To become popular, knowledge has to be based on "eine Welt
und Menschenkenntniss        a knowledge of mans concepts, tastes
and inclinations. This sentence from the Logic circumscribes the
demands of popular knowledge-How can we not consider this
the very definition of anthropology? The Anthropology, as a
work in the form of popularity, is grounded in itself in the
sense that it is knowledge of man and of the world. Popular"
knowledge and knowledge of the "popular"-in order to exist, it
is what it implies.
     This circle is not to be undone, but to be taken as it presents
itself, where it presents itself-that is, in language. For language
offers the possibility of speaking and of speaking about language,
and of doing so in the same movement; it is in the everyday use of
the inexhaustible source of these examples that reading goes on,
uninterrupted, and in the familiarity of what is known, writing. To
say that a book is popular because readers can find further examples
for themselves is to say that, between the author and the reading
public, there is the undivided basis of an everyday language which
goes on speaking, without transition and without change, even
after the last page. Anthropology, popular knowledge, can find its
basis in itself because, speaking a shared language, it speaks of a
shared language, and sheds light on it from within. It is therefore a
knowledge of man that man himself can immediately understand,
recognise, and indefinitely extend-for the two are subject to the
same inexhaustible language.
     Unlike those texts not intended for a general readership, the
Anthropology does not set out to define and to justify its vocabulary.
On the contrary, it welcomes language in the totality of a use which
is never called into question. The weft of the text, its empirical
guiding thread, is none other than the patient effort to exhaust the
verbal forms of a theme, and to give each theme, along with its pre-
cise meaning, with its proper scope. The terms used in the
eighteenth century in the classification of illnesses, terms such as
einfdltig, dumm. Tor, Narr, Geek, unklug are accused of being
misleading and unnecessary, falling only within a popular use of
language, itself based on an obscure and doubtful tradition; they
should be replaced by a terminology which supposedly reproduces
a logical articulation of the real in the space of nature. Now, it is
precisely these words which form the basis and the very substance
of Kant s analysis. It is not a question of ordering the proliferating
language of man on the basis of the silent Logos of nature; rather,
it is about totalizing this language, on the assumption that every
one of its inflections brings with it a particular modality of mean-
ing. The distinction that everyday language makes between dumm,
 Ton and Narr is just as valid and meaningful as that which, establishing differences in kind, the naturalists make between the terms
vesania and insania. On the anthropological level, there is no such
thing as misleading language, nor even an erroneous vocabulary.
     In one sense, the Anthropology is a kind of general idiom.
Here, well-known expressions are given their full weight. Some-
thing is thought in everything that is said. It is enough to ask, and
to listen. Why do we often say: ein richtiger Verstand, eine geiibte
Urteilskraft, eine grundliche Vernunfi"? Is there not something in
this which goes straight to the heart of the matter? What serious
game is being played out in the opposition between eine langweilige Unterredung and ein kurzweiliger Mensch ? What are we
saying when we say Geld ist die Losung?" Furthermore, there
are all those maxims which, by force of habit, serve as ready-made
expressions in the language of man: as guides to etiquette, current trends, how it is customary to conduct oneself in
public They all have their justification. But that justification
does not stem from something outside of human practice; nor is
it hidden in a distant past: other than a note on the meaning of
and the penchant for business amongst the Jews, Kant offers no
historical explanations in the Anthropology. The meaning of these
idiomatic expressions is always of their own time. It is only by pursuing the thread of language and its use, by taking the time to
examine both, and by bringing them together in the context of a
kind of empirical mapping, that these expressions say what it is
that they really want to say. Anthropology is the elucidation of
that already established language-whether explicit or silent-
through which man engages with things and enters their likenesses
into a system of exchange, reciprocity, and silent understanding,
which in fact forms neither the republic of minds, nor amounts to
the total appropriation of nature but this universal citizenship of
man in the world.

     The Anthropology is thus rooted in a German system of expression
and experience. To be sure, Kant tried to extend his analysis beyond
this domain by looking at the way foreign languages are spoken, and
by referring to other linguistic systems. No doubt he made use of
what was the most particular to his experience so as to overcome its
limitations: Konigsberg, an administrative capital, university town
and business centre, situated at a crossroads and close to the sea, has

a guaranteed pedagogical value when it comes to understanding
man as a citizen of the whole world. But all this does not prevent
Anthropology from inhering situated within geographical and linquistic space from which it cannot quite be dissociated. It is a reflection
on and in a system of constituted and all-encompassing signs.
     Since the decline of Latin as the universal language of learning
and philosophy, the universality of the meaning expressed in modern languages was not, for those who spoke them or heard them,
ever in question. For keeping watch over the new language that had
effectively been put to work was the secret law of a Latinity; a law
which, although buried, had not yet been absorbed; a law which
served to guarantee the intrinsic exchange value of what was said,
without remainder. That Kant never fails to assidiously note the
equivalent word in Latin throughout the three Critiques shows that
the universality of his argument is at- one with a certain implicit
Latinity. The Latin referencing is systematic and essential. In the
Critique ofPure Reason, Kant is even embarassed by his German,
and considers it a limitation. When in his own language he struggles to find the appropriate expression, he has recourse to '"some
dead learned language, even if this means having to restore words
to their proper meaning, which having been in use for so long, they
had deviated from." It is better to use Latin than to hamper the
 march of science      by overrefining the German language.
     The references to Latin are perhaps as frequent in the Anthropology as they are in the Critiques. But they are no longer essential,
having only the value of signposts and points of reference. Sometimes, they allow Kant to highlight a semantic ambiguity: Leicht
and schwer can mean light-hearted and serious as well as easy and
dificult. At others, they take the place of analysis in the scientific
tradition: Unsinnigkeit-amentia, Wahnsinn-sementia, Wahnwitz-
insania, Aberwitz-vesania. At others still, they serve to
determine the system of correspondences between critical thought
and anthropology. But the real work, the path taken by the think-
ing in the Anthropologyy does not pass through this Latinity, rather
it is directed by the German system of expression. The term
Melancholia, for example, does not come close to the true meaning
of Tiefsinnigkeir, to discover its meaning, one would have to take
into account the whole tradition of the German language: the
series Scharfsinnigkeit 1 Leichtsinnigkeit...102 etc., on the one hand
and, on the other, its subtle opposition, which is not easy to unravel, to the Tiefdenken.m Then there is also the lexical ield of Sagen:

 Wahrsagen, Vorhersagen, and Weissagen. And, above all, the great,
complex dynasty of Dichten.
     On the surface, as if on the level of quasi-synonyms, Kant
joins words designating other forms of invention, whether psycho-
logical or technical, together: entdecken, entfinden, etwas ausftndig
machen, ersinneny ausdenken, erdichten.m But if we look at the vertical dimension of the text, and follow the thread of the mental
powers, we find first the Vermogen Ideen zu schaffen"m in a broad
sense. Then the ability to give form to those ideas according to the
laws of the productive imagination: the Vermogem zu bilden.
When spiritual power and taste dictate the products of the imagination, we are dealing with Dichtkunst1 in the general
sense-which can appeal to the eyes as well as to the ears. Finally,
when that art takes the justifiably solemn form of verse, we are
dealing with poetry in the strict sense. But, on each of these lev-
els, the Dichtung 7 finds itself caught in a an opposition where, if
is it not restored to its precise meaning, it risks becoming other
than and losing itself: the danger of Beredsamkeit  which inverts
the relationship between understanding and sensibility; the dan-
ger of Naturmalereiiw which limits itself to imitation; the danger
of Versmacherei"    deprived of spiritual power. Thus the complex
 network of the Dichtung is identified and defined thanks to the
 totalization of the lexical field to which it belongs. Yet the faculties thus revealed do not, in their structure, serve as the guiding
 thread of the analysis; rather, the powers are glimpsed through
 the web of words such it is knotted together through so many
years of daily use. To be sure, Kant occasionally corrects how people speak, picking up on such and such ambiguity; but he does
 so in the name of a distinction which really exists, so as to
 denounce those who, speaking hurriedly, do not make use of it,
 considering it null and void.
      That philosophical reflection broke away from the universality
of the Latin form in this way is important. Henceforth, philosophical language would see that it was possible to locate its place of
origin, and to define its field of exploration, within a given linguistic system. That this language be linked to a linguistic system does
not serve to relativize or to limit the meaning that it bears, but
 locates the discovery of that meaning within a determined lexical
field. This connection between philosophical meaning and the
 meanings given in a linguistic system-which will turn out to be so
 decisive for German thought-is not yet reflected upon in and of
 itself in the Anthropology, even if it is appealed to at every instant:
 the real grounds of the anthropological experience is far more linguistic than it is psychological. And yet, language is not yet
presented as a system to be interrogated, but rather as an element
which goes without saying, in which we find ourselves from the
beginning; an instrument of exchange, a vehicule for dialogue, a
form of virtual understanding, language is what philosophy and
nonphilosophy have in common. It is in language that the one
meets the other-or rather, that they communicate.
     There is, then, a Kantian Banquet-the insistence in the
Anthropology on communal meals, those miniscule units of society;
the importance of the Unterhaltung,U] of what is and what must
be exchanged there; the prestige of the moral and social model of
a Gesellschaftni where everyone is connected and, at the same time,
everyone is sovereign; the value of the discourse which, in the dialogue between one person to another, and engaging everyone,
emerges and is realized. From the point of view of anthropology,
the grouping which has a paradigmatic value is not the family, nor
the state, but the TischgeseUsehaft.113 For, when it faithfully obeys
its own rules, the Tischgesellschaft looks like the particular image of
universality. There, through the transparency of a common language, a bond linking everyone has to be established: no one
should feel privileged, and no one should feel isolated; everybody,
whether speaking or silent, has to be present together in the shared
sovereignity of speech. None of the three major functions of language should be left out: statement of contingent fact {Erzdhlen)\
formulation, exchange, and rectification of judgement
(Rdsonieren); free-play of language with itself {Scherzen). It is
essential that each of these three functions takes turn to hold sway
in a movement that is the proper rhythm of this kind of gather-
ing: first, the novelty of the event, then the gravity of the
universal, and finally the irony of play. As for the content of the
conversation itself, it must obey the laws of an internal structure:
those of a flexible continuity, which procedes without break, so
that each persons freedom to formulate his or her opinion, to
insist upon it or to take the conversation in another direction, is
never felt by others to be an abuse or a constraint. Thus, in the
regulated aspect of language, the expression of freedoms and the
possibility, for individuals, of gathering together to form a whole,
can happen spontaneously, without the intervention from an out-
side force or authority, renunciation, or alienation. By speaking
within the community of a Convivium, freedoms encounter one
another and, spontaneously, are universalized. Everyone is free,
but in the form of totality.
    We should no longer be surprised by the promise made at the
beginning of the Anthropology, which was to study man as a citizen of the world      a promise which the book seemed to go back
 on, by limiting itself to an analysis of the Gemiit. In fact,
anthrolopogys man is indeed a Weltbiirger, but not in the sense
that he belongs to a given social group or such and such institution. He is Weltbiirger purely and simply because he speaks. It is in
the exchange of language that he manages on his own account
both to attain and to realize the concrete universal. His living in
the world is, originarily, residence in language.
    The truth that anthropology brings to light is therefore not a
truth anterior to language, and that that language will be entrusted to convey. It is a truth that is both more interior and more
complex: it is in the very movement of the exchange, and that
exchange realizes the universal truth of man. Just as, earlier, we
saw how the originary could be defined as temporality itself, we
can now say that the originary is not to be found in an already
given, secret meaning, but in what is the most manifest path of the
exchange. It is here that language takes, realizes, and rediscovers its
reality; it is also here that man exhibits his anthropological truth.

The Anthropology is therefore "systematically projected" by a reference to the Critique which works across time; it also has the value of
popularity because its thinking is situated within a given language
that it makes transparent without reformulating it, for the very particularities of that language are the legitimate birthplace of universal
significations. From an anthropological perspective, then, truth
takes its shape through the temporal dispersion of syntheses and in
the movement of language and exchange; there, it does not find its
most primitive form, nor the moments leading to its constitution,
nor indeed the pure shock of the already given; it finds, in a time
that has already elapsed, and in a language which is already spoken,
within a temporal flux and a linguistic system never given at degree
zero, something like its original form: the universal emerges from
the very heart of experience in the movement of the truly temporal
and the actually exchanged. It is in this way that the analysis of the
Gemiit (in the form of inner sense) becomes cosmopolitan prescription (in the form of human universality).
    We saw above how, through the very repetition of the Critique,
anthropological thinking constitutes the moment of the passage
into transcendental philosophy. It is easy to see how this repetition
might acquire the structure, function, and value of a transition:
even if the repetition of the Critique occurs on a straightforwardly
empirical level, it is repeated on this level in such a way that the
syntheses of truth (which is to say, the constitution of the necessary
in the realm of experience) henceforth appear in the domain of
freedom (in the recognition of the particular as universal subject).
The Anthropology repeats the Critique ofPure Reason on an empirical level where the Critique ofPractical Reason finds itself already
repeated: the realm of the necessary is also the domain of the
imperative. The Anthropology is therefore essentially the investigation of a field where the practical and the theoretical intersect with
and cover one another entirely; it repeats, in the same place and in
the same language, the a priori of knowledge and the moral imperative and, in doing so, through the movement of this empirical
discourse which is its very own, it initiates what it postulates: a
transcendental philosophy where the correlation between truth and
freedom is defined from the very beginning. In other words, this
anthropologico critical repetition is grounded neither in itself nor
in the Critique: it is based on a fundamental thinking, with regard
to which the Anthropology-which has neither the substance of the
repeated, nor the depth of that which grounds the repetition, and
which therefore amounts only to the transitional but necessary
moment of repetition-cannot but erase itself, and disappear, paradoxically, as having been essential.
     Initiated by Anthropology but also, by the very fact of that overture, soon free of it, transcendental philosophy is thus able to deal,
on its own level, with the problem that, at Anthropology s insistence, it was forced it to unveil: the bond between truth and
freedom. For it is this very relationship that is in question in thegreat tripartition that is repeated constantly throughout the Opus
Postumum: God, the world, and man. God who is "Persdnlichkeit"
who is freedom, who is, with regard to man and to the world,
absolute source-, world that is the whole, closed in on itself, of the
objects of experience, that is truth, and impassable domain\ as for
man, he is their synthesis-that which in God and the world actu-
ally unify. And yet, with regard to the world he is only one of its
inhabitants, and with regard to God only a limited being. Which is
enough of an indication that the bond between truth and freedom
takes the form of finitude, and in this way brings us back to the
very root of critical thought. We are at the level of that which
grounds the refusal of an intuitive intellect.
    These three terms, God, the world, and man, in their fundamental relationship to one another, get these notions of source,
domain, and limit going again-the organizational persistence and
force of which we have already seen at work in Kantian thought. It
was these three notions which obscurely governed over the three
essential questions of the Philosophieren and the Critiques', it was
the same three notions which made explicit the content of the
Anthropology, now, they lend their transcendental meaning to the
questions raised by God taken as an ontological source, the world
as the domain of existences, and by man as the synthesis of the two
in the form of finitude. And perhaps it is precisely because the reign
of these questions appears so universal and so polymorphous, so
transgressive with regard to all possible division, that they lead to
an understanding of the link between critical thinking and an
Anthropology and between an Anthropology and a transcendental
philosophy. The Critique, interrogating the links between passivity
and spontaneity-that is, the a priori-asks a sequence of questions on the basis of the notion of Quellen.UA The Anthropology,
interrogating the links between temporal dispersion and the uni-
versality of language-that is, the originary-is situated within the
problematic which is that of a world already given, of an Umfang   "5
Transcendental philosophy, seeking to define the relationship
between truth and freedom-that is, situating itself in the realm of
the fundamental-cannot fail to come up against the problem of
initude, of Grenzen.

Doubtless it is in the recurrence of these three notions, their
fundamental rootedness, that the movement according to which
the conceptual destiny, that is, the problematic, of contemporary
philosophy can be seen to take shape: that dispersion which no
confusion, dialectical or phenomenological, will have the right to
reduce, and which divides up the field of all philosophical reflection according to the a priori, the originaryy and the fundamental.
Since Kant, the implicit project of all philosophy has been to over-
come this essential division, to the point where it becomes clear
that such overcoming cannot take place outside of a thinking
which repeats it, and by repeating it, instates it. Anthropology is
precisely the site where that confusion will be reproduced, incessantly. Whether it is referred to as such, or concealed in other
projects, Anthropology, or at least the anthropological level of
reflection, will come to alienate philosophy. The intermediary
character of the originary and, with it, of anthropological analysis,
situated between the a priori and the fundamental, is what allows
it to function as an impure and unthought hybrid within the
internal economy of philosophy: it will be accorded both the privileges of the a priori and the meaning of the fundamental, the
preliminary character of critical thought and the realized form of
transcendental philosophy; it makes no distinction between the
problematic of the necessary and that of existence; it confuses the
analysis of conditions with the interrogation of finitude. One day,
the whole history of post-Kantian and contemporary philosophy
will have to be envisaged from the point of view of the perpetuation of this confusion-a revised history which would start out by
denouncing it.
     Doubtless, this "destructuring" of the philosophical field, has
never been more sensitively undertaken than in the wake of phenomenology. To be sure, it was Husserl s initial project-such as it
is set out in the Logische UntersuchungenU7-to liberate those
regions of the a priori of forms that reflection on the originary had
been deprived of. But, because the originary can never itself serve
as the grounds for its own liberation, in the end the task of getting
away from the originary conceived as immediate subjectivity falls
to the originary conceived in the density of passive syntheses and
the already there. The reduction gives rise to a transcendental illu-
sion, and never manages to play the role destined for it-which was
to reserve a place for an elided critical reflection. Even the reference
to Descartes,118 which, at one point in Husserl s thinking, takes over
from the predominance of Kantian remembrances, does not succeed in masking this structural imbalance. As soon as all openings
onto the realm of the fundamental stop short of directing us
toward what should have been its justification and its meaning, the
problematic of the Welt and the In-der-Welt is open to the hypothec
of empiricity. All forms of phenomenological psychology, and all
the other variations on the analysis of existence, bear doleful tes-
timony to this.
    What form of blindness prevents us from seeing that the
authentic articulation of the Philosophieren was once again present,
and in a far more restrictive form, in a thinking that was perhaps
not itself aware of what it owed in terms of filiation and fidelity to
the old Chinaman of Konigsberg"?119 We would probably have to
know what "to philosophize with a hammer"120 means, take a pre-
liminary look at what the Morgenrotm is, to understand what
comes back to us in the Eternal return to see there the authentic
repetition, in a world that is our own, of what was, for an already
distant culture, reflection on the a priori, the originary and finitude. For it is there, in that thinking which thought the end of
philosophy, that the possibility of continuing to philosophize, and
the injunction of a new austerity, resides.

A problem remains-one that the movement of Kantian thought
does very little to help unravel: that of empiricity in the anthropologico critical repetition. Must we consider this tendency toward
empiricity an essential aspect of any thinking that wants to find a
path from the a priori to the fundamental? If so, then a science of
man-or, rather, the empirical field in which the science of man is
possible-naturally fits into philosophy s trajectory toward itself.
Or can we conceive of an anthropology which does not find its
content and its laws in empiricity, but which deals with essences in
a mode of reflecting on man that only intuition can enrich and
enliven? There, the empirical would only have the value of an
example, and would neither define nor compromise the form of the
knowledge itself.
    Kant's Anthropology offers no clear response to this. To be sure,
it amounts to nothing more than a collection of empirical examples;
but, precisely because it is nothing more than a collection and rhapsody of examples, the reflexive movement which divides it comes
from elsewhere and is directed elsewhere, without the mode ofsupport offered by the empirical ground this knowledge covers ever
being clearly defined. There is a double system of solidarity at work
in the Anthropology: solidarity with critical reflection and transcendental philosophy on the one hand and, on the other, with a whole
series of anthropological researches which were being undertaken,
primarily in Germany, in the second half of the eighteenth century.
     Working out how Kant's book fits into the chronology and the
network of influence amongst these anthropological texts is by no
means straightforward. For two reasons: the first is that Kantian
thought already had a hold over the science and, in particular, over
the psychology and medicine of the time; the other is the delay in
publishing the Anthropology, a delay which enabled the dissemination of his students notes and textbooks-such as those that Starke
would use some forty years later.122 While it is the case that many
texts published prior to the Anthropology refer explicitly or implic-
itly to Kantian thought, the dates of publication are unreliable,
making it impossible to establish the chain of influence and order
of precedence. To help us to navigate out way through this complex
network, we have only three kinds of landmarks:
     1) Those texts which make an explicit reference to Kant, as in
Ith's Versuch einer Anthropologie (Bern 1794), Schmid's Empirische
Psychologic (lena 1791), and Hufeland's Makrobiotik. We have
already indicated the references that these texts make to Kant. But
we should also add the second edition of Platner s Anthropology to
this list, as well as other works which are written directly under
Kant's influence, such as Kollners "Bestimmung der organischen
Krafte nach Grundsatzen der kritischen Philosophie."
     2) On the other hand, the fact that certain texts were pub-
lished earlier authorizes us to presume that Kant was aware of
them and made use of them in his Anthropology. At the top of this
list we should probably put Tetens' Versuch uber die menschliche
Natur (lyy?),123 Platner's Anthropology (1772), and of course
Baumgartens Psychologia Empirica (1749).12/1 This work, which
Kant annotated, serves as the Anthropology's guiding thread. The
correspondence between the two texts in terms of organization is
striking-you could superimpose them paragraph by para-
graph. Once again we should note that both follow the classic
prescription of eighteenth century psychology, which no doubt
originated in Wolff. But there is more to it than that. Baum-
garten s Psychology furnished Kant with schemas that are taken up
and elaborated upon in the Anthropology: the distinction between
 perceptio primaria and "perceptio adhaerens" becomes in the
Anthropology the doubled-up system ofperceptio primaria et secun-
daria and of "perceptio principalis et adhaerens." The same goes
for Baumgarten's analysis of Wahrsagen and Weissagen which in
Kant s book is spelt out in a distinction made between Vorhersagen,
Wahrsageny and Weissagen.
     3) Finally-and without fear of commiting any serious error-
we can identify the influence of certain texts on the development
of Kant s work. Some of the changes made and new passages added
to the final draft of the Anthropology stem from recently published
texts. We can be sure, for example, that Kant had read Schmid s
Empirische Psychologic, and that he made use of it. In Nachlass's125
notes in the lectures published by Starke, there is no mention what-
soever of the empirical sources that aided and supported
anthropological thinking. It is only in the 1798 text that we see any
mention made of the HilfsmittelnG which, in the order they appear,
are: the history of the world, biographies, theatre and novels.
Now, in 1791, Schmid devoted a paragraph of the Hilfsmittel to the
empirical study of the soul: history books, biographies, notes on
character, tragic and cosmic poetry, the novel. More signifi-
cantly still, the same Schmid distinguishes between three sorts of
human sciences: everything to do with mans interior world (sein
Inneres) and inner sense is called psychology; everything to do with
exteriority {sein Ausseres) and with the body is called medical
anthropology; as for anthropology properly speaking, it has to do with
the study of the interrelations between the interior and the exteri-
or. It is hard not to think that this was where the subtitles that,
from 1791 on, Kant would give to the two sections of the Anthro-
pology, came from.
    There was, then, a whole network of empirical knowledge
which, at the end of the eighteenth century constituted the field of
anthropology. The affinity between this ensemble and Kant s text is
clear, even if it is still not possible to identify precisely the chronological order of the connections or the hierarchy of reciprocal
influences. But we can now investigate the more general meaning
of this field of empirical knowledge which, at the time, had just
emerged and which sought to found a new science: anthropology.
    Let us put the archaeology of a term-whose form, if not its
fate, was determined in the sixteenth century-to one side.
What meaning do these new anthropologies have in relation to the
Cartesian version of the science of man?
      1) It would appear that, at the beginning of the eighteenth century, the initial project of anthropology related to an ensemble of
precise scientific problems: what we too readily refer to as the critique
of the Cartesian mechanism was, at the time, merely a means to articulate, in a theoretical idiom, the new kind of intellectual labour they
were engaged in. Generally speaking, research into the functioning of
the human body at the time prompted a major conceptual split: in
the unity of the physis, which is not in question, what is physical for a
body begins to be distinguished from that which, for bodies in the
plural, is of the order of the physics. What is physical in man is of
nature, but nevertheless not of physics. Hence the curious, and sometimes contradictory, conceptual cross-fertilization of ideas, all of
which come back to this dificulty in organizing the relationship
between the knowledge of physics, of the physical, and of physis.
Wolff holds onto the "physica" as the most general kind of knowledge
of nature, and, within that, names the science of the body physiology. In contrast, Kant groups all empirical knowledge of nature under
 the heading physiology, of which "physics" only covers a small area.
Indeed, if nowadays natural science seems to be at odds with physics,
it is because, since Kant, physics can no longer cover the domain of the
human body. The existence of anthropology is at once the cause and
the effect, or in any case the measure of this variance between the two.
      2) But why should this variance be linked to an anthropology
and not to a general biology? Why does Wolff say that physiology
is a science "de corpore animati, praesertim humano"? Doubtless
because knowledge of man is to be found at the juncture between
the determination of a metaphysical privilege that is the soul and
the mastery of technique that is medicine. Man is therefore the first
theme of knowledge that could have emerged in the field left
empty by the variance between physis and physics. Definitur Physiologia per scientiam corporis animati; strictius a mediusper scientiam
corporis sani; alii tractationem physicam de homine in specie Anthropologiam vocantr
     It is in the sense that physiology is anthropology that it
acquires its specificity; anthropology is its reason for not being
physics pure and simple.
     3) The paradoxical stance adopted by Anthropology (it is the
reason for what it is a part of) is laden with consequences. It means
that anthropology is both the limit of the science of physis and is
the science of that limit; it is the limit worn away, falling short of
itself, of the domain that it delimits, and so defines the nonrelation
in terms of relation, rupture in terms of continuity, finitude in terms
of positivity. Platner said: consideration of the body and soul in
their reciprocal relations, limitations and connections-that is what
I would call anthropology." But Telena127 had quite rightly seen
that, in anthropology, that relationship could only ever be circumscribed from the point of view of physis. And that this would be in
opposition to their philosophical method; according to Telena,
changes in the soul should be taken wie sie durch das Selbstgefuhl
erkannt werden  in analytical psychology, or anthropology, he
considers the changes in the soul von der Seit da sie etwas in dem
Gehirn als dem inner Organ der Seele sind" and are to be explained
 als solche Gehirnsbeschaffenheiten und Verdnderungen  

      4) Because of what was most initiatory in its project, anthropology cannot help being both reductive and normative. Reductive,
because it refuses to accept what man already knows of himself, by
the Selbstgefuhl? but also what he might find out in the process
that involves the mediation of physis. Anthropology concerns only
the phenomenon of the phenomemon, at the conclusion of a flexion
which always implies the horizon of Nature. On the other hand, it
will always be the science of a living body, finalized with regard to
itself, developing on the basis of a sound functioning. Anthropology
is the knowledge of a well-being which, for man, is synonymous
with life. It is, in some ways, the science of the normal par excellence: "Die Lehre von der Beschaffenheit von dem Nutzen der Teile des
menschlichen Korpers im gesunden Zustand?
      5) In this way, anthropology both encircles and envelops all
knowledge of man. It serves as the explicit or implicit horizon of
everything that man can know of himself. And, in the sense that
they all have something to do with man, every other area of scientific

inquiry is placed within the vast field of anthropology: "The first
object that strikes me in this vast ensemble of our knowledge is that
which deals with man considered in his personal relationships, and
men gathered together in political groupings. But as a natural     
being, man grounds his knowledge only by limiting it, only by
engaging in the play of nature which offers him the possibility of
knowledge by withdrawing its value. So an anthropologically-based
science is a science reduced, science on a man-made scale, devoid
of its own truth, but which, for that very reason, restored to the
truth of man. It is in this way that anthropology, being at once a
foundation and a reductive rule, begins to look like a form of normative knowledge, one that preemptively prescribes its teaching, its
possibilities, and its limitations to every other form of scientific
inquiry that engages with man. Hence Iths premonition of different
kinds of anthropology: one would be physiological, another psychological, a third historical, and a fourth moral or teleological.
Serving as the basis for knowledge, or at least constituting the science
which serves as the basis for knowledge, anthropology limits and
finalizes it in a single movement.
    Whatever its empirical content, then, anthropology has an
epistemological structure of its very own. That structure has a
meaning which cannot be superimposed onto the Treatises on
Man"-which, at least in style, is still in the Cartesian tradition nor onto the empiricisms which have always dominated Locke s
thinking.132 Evidently, like the former, it is a knowledge articulated
in the language of nature and, like the latter, it designates the originary. But these are just instances in the context of its total
epistemological structure. That structure in fact pivots on some-
thing that is neither animal nor human: not self-consciousness, but
Menschenwesen. Which is to say: that which is at once mans natural
being, the law of his possibilities, and the a priori limit of his
knowledge. Anthropology is therefore not only the science of man,
as well as being the science and the horizon of all human sciences,
but also the science of that which founds and limits mans knowledge
for him. Herein lies the ambiguity of this Menschen-Kenntniss
which characterises anthropology: it is the knowledge of man, in a
movement which objectifies man on the level of his natural being
and in the content of his animal determinations; at the same time,
it is the knowledge of the knowledge of man, and so can interrogate the subject himself, ask him where his limitations lie, and
about what he sanctions of the knowledge we have of him.
     Anthropology believed that it was calling a sector of nature into
question; in fact, it was asking a question which would cast, over
the philosophy of our time, the shadow of a classical philosophy
henceforth deprived of God: Is itpossible to have empirical knowledge
offinitude? Although Cartesian thinking had confronted this finitude very early on, as early as the experience of error, it was only by
undertaking an ontology of the infinite that it could be definitively dismissed. As for empiricism, it practiced this finitude, referring
to it incessantly, but as much as its own limitation as the frontier
of knowledge. The anthropological interrogation of finitude is of a
different order: for anthropology, it is question of knowing if, on
the level of man, a knowledge of finitude can exist, a knowledge
sufficiently liberated and grounded so as to be able think that finititude in itself-that is, as a form of positivity.
     It is here that the major reorganization undertaken by Kant
intervenes. The internal structure of Anthropology and the question
which secretly animates the book in fact take the same form as
critical enquiry itself: it, too, presumes to know the possibilities
and the limitations of knowledge; from a position of exteriority, it
mimicks, in the gestures of empiricity the movement of critical
philosophy; furthermore, what it takes as given seems to be able to
function as an a priori. For a long time, the "anthropologists"
thought that they could absorb Kants teachings without any difficulty, without any rethinking on their part being required: Schmid,
Hufeland, and Ith are the first to attest to this, but the list could go
on and on, and is by no means confined to the eighteenth century.
It would take the inflexible naivety of our contemporaries to
congratulate anthropology for having at last moved beyond the
dissociations-between body and soul, subject and object-in
which the drought of rationalism would otherwise have been lost.
But what they took to be the marvel of renconcilation was in fact
just the more predicatable miracle of their failure to register the
grammatical ambiguity of Menschenkenntniss.
     In fact, the moment we think that we can give critical thought
the value of positive knowledge, we will have forgotten the essential point of Kants lesson. The difficulty we encountered in
situating the Anthropology in relation to the critical ensemble ought
to have been indication enough that the lesson is not simple. What
Kant teaches us is that Anthropology empiricity cannot be grounded
in itself, that it is possible only on account of the repetition of the
Critique, that it therefore cannot contain the Critiques but that

 could not help referring to it; and if the Anthropology looks like the
 extrinsic and empirical analogon of the Critique it is because it is
 based on the structures of the a priori that had already been identiied and made known. In the general organization of Kantian
 thought, finitude can therefore never be thought on its own level; it
 presents itself to knowledge and to discourse only in a secondary
 fashion; but that to which it is bound to refer is not an ontology of
 the infinite; rather, it is, in their organization of the ensemble, the a
 priori conditions of knowledge. Which is to say that Anthropology
finds itself doubly beholden to critical thought: as knowledge, it
 relies on the conditions that it sets and the realm of experience that
it determines; as an investigation of finitude, it relies on the first,
impassable forms that critical thought makes manifest.
      Thus understood, the job of Anthropology bears some resemblance to that of the Anfangsgrunde der Natur to reveal the
system of articulation between critical thought and the a priori
forms of knowledge on the one hand, and, on the other, to reveal,
in the Critique, the principles of an empirically constituted and historically developed knowledge. But lying beneath this apparent
symmetry is a profound dissymmetry: in the Anfangsgrunde, it is a
question of physics, and thus of a science constituted in its plenitude and its truth; in the Anthropology, we are dealing with physis,
and so with that layer of knowledge which deals with imperfections, frontiers, and failings-in short, with negativity in nature. In
other words, the continuity from the Critique to the Anfangsgrunde
is guaranteed by the forms of symmetrical activity and the truth
that critical thought establishes and structures; between the Critique and the Anthropology, the continuity is given by the fact that
both insist on limitations, and on the inflexibility of the finitude
that they gesture toward. The Foundations ofNatural Science does
without God and renders the hypothesis of an actual infinity-
the internal contradiction of which critical thought made
clear-futile; the Anthropology indicates the absence of God, and
occupies the void that the infinite leaves in its wake. No doubt
the reciprocal inversion, the dissymmetrical symmetry of the synthesis and the limit, are at the heart of Kantian thought: this is the
source from which the Critique draws its privileges with regard to
all possible knowledge.
     It is now time to return to the problem we began with-how
the critical enterprise was accompanied by the lectures on anthropology, that unchanging counterpoint in relation to which Kant
redoubled the effort of transcendental reflection through the constant accumulation of empirical knowledge of man. That Kant
taught anthropology for twenty-five years stems from something
more than the demands of university life; this persistence is linked
to the very structure of the Kantian problem: How to think,
analyse, justify, and ground finitude in a thinking which does not
take the path of an ontology of the infinite and does not find its
justification in a philosophy of the absolute? The question is effectively at work in the Anthropology but, because it cannot be
thought for itself in the context of an empirical enquiry, it cannot
assume its true dimensions there. Hence the marginal character of
anthropology with regard to the Kantian enterprise: it is at once
essential and inessential-a border that is peripheral to the centre,
but which never stops referring to and interrogating it. One could
say that the critical movement broke away from the anthropological
structure, both because the latter gives it its outline, and because
the critical movement acquires its value only by breaking free of
anthropology, by turning against it, and, in so doing, by grounding
it. The epistemological configuration proper to anthropology
mimicks that of the Critique-, but it was a question of how to avoid
getting caught up in the prestige that this affords, and how to rein-
state the rational order of this resemblance. That order used to
consist in making the Anthropology gravitate around the Critique.
And that order reinstated was, for anthropology, the authentic
form of its liberation-the revelation of its true meaning: the
Anthropology could now emerge as that in which the transition
from the a priori to the fundamental, from critical thought to transcendental philosophy, is announced.
    We see what web of confusion and illusion anthropology and
contemporary philosophy are tangled up in. One aim has been to
make the Anthropology count as a Critique, as a critique liberated
from the prejudices and the dead weight of the a priori, overlook-
ing the fact that it can give access to the realm of the fundamental
only if remains under the sway of critical thought. Another (which
is just another version of the same oversight) has been to turn
anthropology into a positive field which would serve as the basis for
and the possibility of all the human sciences, whereas in fact it can
only speak the language of the limit and of negativity: its sole pur-
pose is to convey, from the vigour of critical thought to the
transcendental foundation, the precedence of finitude.
    In the name of what is-that is to say what ought to be on the
basis of its essence-anthropology within the field of philosophy as
a whole, we challenge all those philosophical anthropologies that
present themselves as the natural access to the fundamental, as well
as all those philosophies which define their starting point and their
scope through a certain kind of anthropological reflection on man.
In both, we find the play of an "illusion" proper to Western philosophy since Kant. In its anthropological form, it serves as the
counterpoint to the transcendental illusion harboured by pre-Kantian
 metaphysics. It will be by way of symmetry and taking the latter as
 our guiding thread that we will come to an understanding of what
 the anthropological illusion consists in.
      For the one effectively derives historically from the other-or,
 rather, it is thanks to a shift in the meaning given to the transcendental illusion in Kantian critique that the anthropological illusion
 could emerge. The necessary character of the emergence of the
 transcendental is frequently interpreted, not as a structure of truth,
phenomenon and experience, but as one of the concrete marks of
finitude. But what Kant had ambiguously designated as "natural"
 in that emergence had been forgotten as a fundamental form of the
relationship to the object and resurrected as the nature in human
 nature. As a result, instead of being defined by the movement that
criticized it in the context of a reflection on knowledge, the illusion
was submitted to an anterior level where it reemerged as both
divided and grounded: it had become the truth of truth-hence-
forth, truth would be always present and yet never given; thus the
illusion had become both the raison d'etre and the source of critical
thinking, the origin of that movement by which man loses sight of
and is incessantly recalled to truth. The illusion henceforth defined
as finitude would become above all else the retreat of truth: that in
which truth hides and in which truth can always be found.
    It is in this way that, from a structural point of view, the
anthropological illusion looks like the reverse, the mirror image of
the transcendental illusion. The latter consisted in the application
of the principles of understanding beyond the limits of experience,
and thus in admitting an actual infinite to the field of possible
knowledge through a kind of spontaneous transgression. The
anthropological illusion resides in a reflexive regression which has
to answer for that transgression. Finitude is only gone beyond if it
is something other than itself, if it rests on a shortfall in which it
finds its source; it falls short, it is itself, but withdrawn from the
 field of experience where it is encountered and introduced into the
  realm of the originary in which it is grounded. The problem of
finitude goes from interrogating the limit and transgression134 to
 interrogating the return to the self; from a problematic of truth to
a problematic of the same and other. It has entered into the domain
of alienation.
     And the paradox is this: freeing itself from a preliminary critique of knowledge and an initial interrogation of the relationship
to the object, philosophy did not manage to free itself from sub-
jectivity as the fundamental thesis and starting point of its enquiry.
On the contrary, it locked itself into subjectivity by conceiving of
it as thickened, essentialized, enclosed in the impassable structure
of menschliches Wesen       in which that extenuated truth which is
the truth of truth keeps vigil and gathers itself.
    We can now see why, in a single movement, characteristic of
the thinking of our time, all knowledge of man is presented as
either dialecticized from the start or fully dialecticizable-as always
invested with a meaning which has to do with the return to the ori-
gin, to the authentic, to the founding activity, to the reason why
there is meaning in the world. We can also see why all philosophy
presents itself as capable of communicating directly with the sciences of man or empirical studies of man without having to take a
detour through a critique, an epistemology, or a theory of knowledge. Anthropology is the secret path which, orientated toward the
foundations of our knowledge, connects, in the form of an
unthought mediation, mans experience with philosophy. The val-
ues implicit in the question Was its der Mensch? are responsible for
this homogenous, de-structured and infinitely reversible field in
which man presents his truth as the soul of truth. The polymorphous notions of meaning, structure, and "genesis"-whatever
value they might have, and which a rigorous reflection ought to
restore to them-here indicate only the confusion of the domain
in which they assume their communicative roles. That these
notions circulate indiscriminately throughout the human sciences
and philosophy does not justify us in thinking this or that, as if in
unison, this or that; it merely points up our incapacity to undertake a veritable critique of the anthropological illusion.
    And yet, the model for just such a critique was given to us more
than fifty years ago. The Nietzschean enterprise can be understood
as at last bringing that proliferation of the questioning of man to
an end. For is not the death of God in effect manifested in a doubly murderous gesture which, by putting an end to the absolute, is
at the same time the cause of the death of man himself? For man,
in his finitude, is not distinguishable from the infinite of which he
is both the negation and the harbinger; it is in the death of man
that the death of God is realized. Is it not possible to conceive of a
critique of finitude which would be as liberating with regard to
man as it would be with regard to the infinite, and which would
show that finitude is not an end but rather that camber and knot
in time when the end is in fact a beginning?
     The trajectory of the question Was ist der Mensch? in the field
of philosophy reaches its end in the response which both challenges
and disarms it: der Ubermensch.